BOOK I

(ll. 1-4) Beginning with thee, O Phoebus, I will recount the famous
deeds of men of old, who, at the behest of King Pelias, down through the
mouth of Pontus and between the Cyanean rocks, sped well-benched Argo in
quest of the golden fleece.

(ll. 5-17) Such was the oracle that Pelias heard, that a hateful doom
awaited him to be slain at the prompting of the man whom he should
see coming forth from the people with but one sandal. And no long time
after, in accordance with that true report, Jason crossed the stream
of wintry Anaurus on foot, and saved one sandal from the mire, but the
other he left in the depths held back by the flood. And straightway he
came to Pelias to share the banquet which the king was offering to his
father Poseidon and the rest of the gods, though he paid no honour to
Pelasgian Hera. Quickly the king saw him and pondered, and devised for
him the toil of a troublous voyage, in order that on the sea or among
strangers he might lose his home-return.

(ll. 18-22) The ship, as former bards relate, Argus wrought by the
guidance of Athena. But now I will tell the lineage and the names of the
heroes, and of the long sea-paths and the deeds they wrought in their
wanderings; may the Muses be the inspirers of my song!

(ll. 23-34) First then let us name Orpheus whom once Calliope bare, it
is said, wedded to Thracian Oeagrus, near the Pimpleian height. Men say
that he by the music of his songs charmed the stubborn rocks upon the
mountains and the course of rivers. And the wild oak-trees to this day,
tokens of that magic strain, that grow at Zone on the Thracian shore,
stand in ordered ranks close together, the same which under the charm of
his lyre he led down from Pieria. Such then was Orpheus whom Aeson's
son welcomed to share his toils, in obedience to the behest of Cheiron,
Orpheus ruler of Bistonian Pieria.

(ll. 35-39) Straightway came Asterion, whom Cometes begat by the waters
of eddying Apidanus; he dwelt at Peiresiae near the Phylleian mount,
where mighty Apidanus and bright Enipeus join their streams, coming
together from afar.

(ll. 40-44) Next to them from Larisa came Polyphemus, son of Eilatus,
who aforetime among the mighty Lapithae, when they were arming
themselves against the Centaurs, fought in his younger days; now his
limbs were grown heavy with age, but his martial spirit still remained,
even as of old.

(ll. 45-48) Nor was Iphiclus long left behind in Phylace, the uncle
of Aeson's son; for Aeson had wedded his sister Alcimede, daughter of
Phylacus: his kinship with her bade him be numbered in the host.

(ll. 49-50) Nor did Admetus, the lord of Pherae rich in sheep, stay
behind beneath the peak of the Chalcodonian mount.

(ll. 51-56) Nor at Alope stayed the sons of Hermes, rich in corn-land,
well skilled in craftiness, Erytus and Echion, and with them on their
departure their kinsman Aethalides went as the third; him near the
streams of Amphrysus Eupolemeia bare, the daughter of Myrmidon, from
Phthia; the two others were sprung from Antianeira, daughter of Menetes.

(ll. 57-64) From rich Gyrton came Coronus, son of Caeneus, brave, but
not braver than his father. For bards relate that Caeneus though still
living perished at the hands of the Centaurs, when apart from other
chiefs he routed them; and they, rallying against him, could neither
bend nor slay him; but unconquered and unflinching he passed beneath the
earth, overwhelmed by the downrush of massy pines.

(ll. 65-68) There came too Titaresian Mopsus, whom above all men the son
of Leto taught the augury of birds; and Eurydamas the son of Ctimenus;
he dwelt at Dolopian Ctimene near the Xynian lake.

(ll. 69-70) Moreover Actor sent his son Menoetius from Opus that he
might accompany the chiefs.

(ll. 71-76) Eurytion followed and strong Eribotes, one the son of
Teleon, the other of Irus, Actor's son; the son of Teleon renowned
Eribotes, and of Irus Eurytion. A third with them was Oileus, peerless
in courage and well skilled to attack the flying foe, when they break
their ranks.

(ll. 77-85) Now from Euboea came Canthus eager for the quest, whom
Canethus son of Abas sent; but he was not destined to return to
Cerinthus. For fate had ordained that he and Mopsus, skilled in the
seer's art, should wander and perish in the furthest ends of Libya. For
no ill is too remote for mortals to incur, seeing that they buried them
in Libya, as far from the Colchians as is the space that is seen between
the setting and the rising of the sun.

(ll. 86-89) To him Clytius and Iphitus joined themselves, the warders
of Oechalia, sons of Eurytus the ruthless, Eurytus, to whom the
Far-shooting god gave his bow; but he had no joy of the gift; for of his
own choice he strove even with the giver.

(ll. 90-94) After them came the sons of Aeacus, not both together, nor
from the same spot; for they settled far from Aegina in exile, when in
their folly they had slain their brother Phoeus. Telamon dwelt in the
Attic island; but Peleus departed and made his home in Phthia.

(ll. 95-104) After them from Cecropia came warlike Butes, son of brave
Teleon, and Phalerus of the ashen spear. Alcon his father sent him
forth; yet no other sons had he to care for his old age and livelihood.
But him, his well-beloved and only son, he sent forth that amid bold
heroes he might shine conspicuous. But Theseus, who surpassed all the
sons of Erechtheus, an unseen bond kept beneath the land of Taenarus,
for he had followed that path with Peirithous; assuredly both would have
lightened for all the fulfilment of their toil.

(ll. 105-114) Tiphys, son of Hagnias, left the Siphaean people of the
Thespians, well skilled to foretell the rising wave on the broad sea,
and well skilled to infer from sun and star the stormy winds and the
time for sailing. Tritonian Athena herself urged him to join the band
of chiefs, and he came among them a welcome comrade. She herself too
fashioned the swift ship; and with her Argus, son of Arestor, wrought
it by her counsels. Wherefore it proved the most excellent of all ships
that have made trial of the sea with oars.

(ll. 115-117) After them came Phlias from Araethyrea, where he dwelt
in affluence by the favour of his father Dionysus, in his home by the
springs of Asopus.

(ll. 118-121) From Argos came Talaus and Areius, sons of Bias, and
mighty Leodocus, all of whom Pero daughter of Neleus bare; on her
account the Aeolid Melampus endured sore affliction in the steading of
Iphiclus.

(ll. 122-132) Nor do we learn that Heracles of the mighty heart
disregarded the eager summons of Aeson's son. But when he heard a report
of the heroes' gathering and had reached Lyrceian Argos from Arcadia by
the road along which he carried the boar alive that fed in the thickets
of Lampeia, near the vast Erymanthian swamp, the boar bound with chains
he put down from his huge shoulders at the entrance to the market-place
of Mycenae; and himself of his own will set out against the purpose of
Eurystheus; and with him went Hylas, a brave comrade, in the flower of
youth, to bear his arrows and to guard his bow.

(ll. 133-138) Next to him came a scion of the race of divine Danaus,
Nauplius. He was the son of Clytonaeus son of Naubolus; Naubolus was son
of Lernus; Lernus we know was the son of Proetus son of Nauplius; and
once Amymone daughter of Danaus, wedded to Poseidon, bare Nauplius, who
surpassed all men in naval skill.

(ll. 139-145) Idmon came last of all them that dwelt at Argos, for
though he had learnt his own fate by augury, he came, that the people
might not grudge him fair renown. He was not in truth the son of Abas,
but Leto's son himself begat him to be numbered among the illustrious
Aeolids; and himself taught him the art of prophecy--to pay heed to
birds and to observe the signs of the burning sacrifice.

(ll. 146-150) Moreover Aetolian Leda sent from Sparta strong Polydeuces
and Castor, skilled to guide swift-footed steeds; these her dearly-loved
sons she bare at one birth in the house of Tyndareus; nor did she forbid
their departure; for she had thoughts worthy of the bride of Zeus.

(ll. 151-155) The sons of Aphareus, Lynceus and proud Idas, came from
Arene, both exulting in their great strength; and Lynceus too excelled
in keenest sight, if the report is true that that hero could easily
direct his sight even beneath the earth.

(ll. 156-160) And with them Neleian Periclymenus set out to come, eldest
of all the sons of godlike Neleus who were born at Pylos; Poseidon had
given him boundless strength and granted him that whatever shape he
should crave during the fight, that he should take in the stress of
battle.

(ll. 161-171) Moreover from Arcadia came Amphidamas and Cepheus, who
inhabited Tegea and the allotment of Apheidas, two sons of Aldus; and
Ancaeus followed them as the third, whom his father Lycurgus sent, the
brother older than both. But he was left in the city to care for Aleus
now growing old, while he gave his son to join his brothers. Antaeus
went clad in the skin of a Maenalian bear, and wielding in his right
hand a huge two-edged battleaxe. For his armour his grandsire had hidden
in the house's innermost recess, to see if he might by some means still
stay his departure.

(ll. 172-175) There came also Augeias, whom fame declared to be the
son of Helios; he reigned over the Eleans, glorying in his wealth; and
greatly he desired to behold the Colchian land and Aeetes himself the
ruler of the Colchians.

(ll. 176-178) Asterius and Amphion, sons of Hyperasius, came from
Achaean Pellene, which once Pelles their grandsire founded on the brows
of Aegialus.

(ll. 179-184) After them from Taenarus came Euphemus whom, most
swift-footed of men, Europe, daughter of mighty Tityos, bare to
Poseidon. He was wont to skim the swell of the grey sea, and wetted not
his swift feet, but just dipping the tips of his toes was borne on the
watery path.

(ll. 185-189) Yea, and two other sons of Poseidon came; one Erginus, who
left the citadel of glorious Miletus, the other proud Ancaeus, who
left Parthenia, the seat of Imbrasion Hera; both boasted their skill in
seacraft and in war.

(ll. 190-201) After them from Calydon came the son of Oeneus, strong
Meleagrus, and Laocoon--Laocoon the brother of Oeneus, though not by the
same mother, for a serving-woman bare him; him, now growing old, Oeneus
sent to guard his son: thus Meleagrus, still a youth, entered the
bold band of heroes. No other had come superior to him, I ween, except
Heracles, if for one year more he had tarried and been nurtured among
the Aetolians. Yea, and his uncle, well skilled to fight whether with
the javelin or hand to hand, Iphiclus son of Thestius, bare him company
on his way.

(ll. 202-206) With him came Palaemonius, son of Olenian Lernus, of
Lernus by repute, but his birth was from Hephaestus; and so he was
crippled in his feet, but his bodily frame and his valour no one would
dare to scorn. Wherefore he was numbered among all the chiefs, winning
fame for Jason.

(ll. 207-210) From the Phocians came Iphitus sprung from Naubolus son of
Ornytus; once he had been his host when Jason went to Pytho to ask for
a response concerning his voyage; for there he welcomed him in his own
hails.

(ll. 211-223) Next came Zetes and Calais, sons of Boreas, whom once
Oreithyia, daughter of Erechtheus, bare to Boreas on the verge of wintry
Thrace; thither it was that Thracian Boreas snatched her away from
Cecropia as she was whirling in the dance, hard by Hissus' stream. And,
carrying her far off, to the spot that men called the rock of Sarpedon,
near the river Erginus, he wrapped her in dark clouds and forced her
to his will. There they were making their dusky wings quiver upon their
ankles on both sides as they rose, a great wonder to behold, wings that
gleamed with golden scales: and round their backs from the top of the
head and neck, hither and thither, their dark tresses were being shaken
by the wind.

(ll. 224-227) No, nor had Acastus son of mighty Pelias himself any will
to stay behind in the palace of his brave sire, nor Argus, helper of the
goddess Athena; but they too were ready to be numbered in the host.

(ll. 228-233) So many then were the helpers who assembled to join the
son of Aeson. All the chiefs the dwellers thereabout called Minyae, for
the most and the bravest avowed that they were sprung from the blood of
the daughters of Minyas; thus Jason himself was the son of Alcimede who
was born of Clymene the daughter of Minyas.

(ll. 234-241) Now when all things had been made ready by the thralls,
all things that fully-equipped ships are furnished withal when men's
business leads them to voyage across the sea, then the heroes took their
way through the city to the ship where it lay on the strand that men
call Magnesian Pagasae; and a crowd of people hastening rushed together;
but the heroes shone like gleaming stars among the clouds; and each man
as he saw them speeding along with their armour would say:

(ll. 242-246) "King Zeus, what is the purpose of Pelias? Whither is he
driving forth from the Panachaean land so great a host of heroes? On one
day they would waste the palace of Aeetes with baleful fire, should he
not yield them the fleece of his own goodwill. But the path is not to be
shunned, the toil is hard for those who venture."

(ll. 247-250) Thus they spake here and there throughout the city; but
the women often raised their hands to the sky in prayer to the immortals
to grant a return, their hearts' desire. And one with tears thus
lamented to her fellow:

(ll. 251-260) "Wretched Alcimede, evil has come to thee at last though
late, thou hast not ended with splendour of life. Aeson too, ill-fated
man! Surely better had it been for him, if he were lying beneath the
earth, enveloped in his shroud, still unconscious of bitter toils. Would
that the dark wave, when the maiden Helle perished, had overwhelmed
Phrixus too with the ram; but the dire portent even sent forth a human
voice, that it might cause to Alcimede sorrows and countless pains
hereafter."

(ll. 261-277) Thus the women spake at the departure of the heroes. And
now many thralls, men and women, were gathered together, and his mother,
smitten with grief for Jason. And a bitter pang seized every woman's
heart; and with them groaned the father in baleful old age, lying on his
bed, closely wrapped round. But the hero straightway soothed their pain,
encouraging them, and bade the thralls take up his weapons for war; and
they in silence with downcast looks took them up. And even as the mother
had thrown her arms about her son, so she clung, weeping without stint,
as a maiden all alone weeps, falling fondly on the neck of her hoary
nurse, a maid who has now no others to care for her, but she drags on a
weary life under a stepmother, who maltreats her continually with ever
fresh insults, and as she weeps, her heart within her is bound fast
with misery, nor can she sob forth all the groans that struggle for
utterance; so without stint wept Alcimede straining her son in her arms,
and in her yearning grief spake as follows:

(ll. 278-291) "Would that on that day when, wretched woman that I am, I
heard King Pelias proclaim his evil behest, I had straightway given up
my life and forgotten my cares, so that thou thyself, my son, with thine
own hands, mightest have buried me; for that was the only wish left me
still to be fulfilled by time, all the other rewards for thy nurture
have I long enjoyed. Now I, once so admired among Achaean women,
shall be left behind like a bondwoman in my empty halls, pining away,
ill-fated one, for love of thee, thee on whose account I had aforetime
so much splendour and renown, my only son for whom I loosed my virgin
zone first and last. For to me beyond others the goddess Eileithyia
grudged abundant offspring. Alas for my folly! Not once, not even in nay
dreams did I forebode this, that the flight of Phrixus would bring me
woe."

(ll. 292-294) Thus with moaning she wept, and her handmaidens, standing
by, lamented; but Jason spake gently to her with comforting words:

(ll. 295-305) "Do not, I pray thee, mother, store up bitter sorrows
overmuch, for thou wilt not redeem me from evil by tears, but wilt still
add grief to grief. For unseen are the woes that the gods mete out to
mortals; be strong to endure thy share of them though with grief in thy
heart; take courage from the promises of Athena, and from the answers of
the gods (for very favourable oracles has Phoebus given), and then from
the help of the chieftains. But do thou remain here, quiet among thy
handmaids, and be not a bird of ill omen to the ship; and thither my
clansmen and thralls will follow me."

(ll. 306-316) He spake, and started forth to leave the house. And as
Apollo goes forth from some fragrant shrine to divine Delos or Claros or
Pytho or to broad Lyeia near the stream of Xanthus, in such beauty moved
Jason through the throng of people; and a cry arose as they shouted
together. And there met him aged Iphias, priestess of Artemis guardian
of the city, and kissed his right hand, but she had not strength to say
a word, for all her eagerness, as the crowd rushed on, but she was left
there by the wayside, as the old are left by the young, and he passed on
and was gone afar.

(ll. 317-331) Now when he had left the well-built streets of the city,
he came to the beach of Pagasae, where his comrades greeted him as they
stayed together near the ship Argo. And he stood at the entering in,
and they were gathered to meet him. And they perceived Aeastus and Argus
coming from the city, and they marvelled when they saw them hasting with
all speed, despite the will of Pelias. The one, Argus, son of Arestor,
had cast round his shoulders the hide of a bull reaching to his feet,
with the black hair upon it, the other, a fair mantle of double fold,
which his sister Pelopeia had given him. Still Jason forebore from
asking them about each point but bade all be seated for an assembly. And
there, upon the folded sails and the mast as it lay on the ground,
they all took their seats in order. And among them with goodwill spake
Aeson's son:

(ll. 332-340) "All the equipment that a ship needs for all is in due
order--lies ready for our departure. Therefore we will make no long
delay in our sailing for these things' sake, when the breezes but
blow fair. But, friends,--for common to all is our return to Hellas
hereafter, and common to all is our path to the land of Aeetes--now
therefore with ungrudging heart choose the bravest to be our leader,
who shall be careful for everything, to take upon him our quarrels and
covenants with strangers."

(ll. 341-344) Thus he spake; and the young heroes turned their eyes
towards bold Heracles sitting in their midst, and with one shout they
all enjoined upon him to be their leader; but he, from the place where
he sat, stretched forth his right hand and said:

(ll. 345-347) "Let no one offer this honour to me. For I will not
consent, and I will forbid any other to stand up. Let the hero who
brought us together, himself be the leader of the host."

(ll. 348-350) Thus he spake with high thoughts, and they assented, as
Heracles bade; and warlike Jason himself rose up, glad at heart, and
thus addressed the eager throng:

(ll. 351-362) "If ye entrust your glory to my care, no longer as before
let our path be hindered. Now at last let us propitiate Phoebus with
sacrifice and straightway prepare a feast. And until my thralls come,
the overseers of my steading, whose care it is to choose out oxen from
the herd and drive them hither, we will drag down the ship to the sea,
and do ye place all the tackling within, and draw lots for the benches
for rowing. Meantime let us build upon the beach an altar to Apollo
Embasius [1101] who by an oracle promised to point out and show me the
paths of the sea, if by sacrifice to him I should begin my venture for
King Pelias."

(ll. 363-393) He spake, and was the first to turn to the work, and they
stood up in obedience to him; and they heaped their garments, one upon
the other, on a smooth stone, which the sea did not strike with its
waves, but the stormy surge had cleansed it long before. First of all,
by the command of Argus, they strongly girded the ship with a rope well
twisted within, [1102] stretching it tight on each side, in order that
the planks might be well compacted by the bolts and might withstand the
opposing force of the surge. And they quickly dug a trench as wide as
the space the ship covered, and at the prow as far into the sea as it
would run when drawn down by their hands. And they ever dug deeper in
front of the stem, and in the furrow laid polished rollers; and inclined
the ship down upon the first rollers, that so she might glide and be
borne on by them. And above, on both sides, reversing the oars, they
fastened them round the thole-pins, so as to project a cubit's space.
And the heroes themselves stood on both sides at the oars in a row, and
pushed forward with chest and hand at once. And then Tiphys leapt on
board to urge the youths to push at the right moment; and calling
on them he shouted loudly; and they at once, leaning with all their
strength, with one push started the ship from her place, and strained
with their feet, forcing her onward; and Pelian Argo followed swiftly;
and they on each side shouted as they rushed on. And then the rollers
groaned under the sturdy keel as they were chafed, and round them rose
up a dark smoke owing to the weight, and she glided into the sea; but
the heroes stood there and kept dragging her back as she sped onward.
And round the thole-pins they fitted the oars, and in the ship they
placed the mast and the well-made sails and the stores.

(ll. 394-401) Now when they had carefully paid heed to everything, first
they distributed the benches by lot, two men occupying one seat; but the
middle bench they chose for Heracles and Ancaeus apart from the other
heroes, Ancaeus who dwelt in Tegea. For them alone they left the middle
bench just as it was and not by lot; and with one consent they entrusted
Tiphys with guarding the helm of the well-stemmed ship.

(ll. 402-410) Next, piling up shingle near the sea, they raised there
an altar on the shore to Apollo, under the name of Actius [1103] and
Embasius, and quickly spread above it logs of dried olive-wood. Meantime
the herdsmen of Aeson's son had driven before them from the herd two
steers. These the younger comrades dragged near the altars, and the
others brought lustral water and barley meal, and Jason prayed, calling
on Apollo the god of his fathers:

(ll. 411-424) "Hear, O King, that dwellest in Pagasae and the city
Aesonis, the city called by my father's name, thou who didst promise me,
when I sought thy oracle at Pytho, to show the fulfilment and goal of my
journey, for thou thyself hast been the cause of my venture; now do thou
thyself guide the ship with my comrades safe and sound, thither and back
again to Hellas. Then in thy honour hereafter we will lay again on thy
altar the bright offerings of bulls--all of us who return; and other
gifts in countless numbers I will bring to Pytho and Ortygia. And now,
come, Far-darter, accept this sacrifice at our hands, which first of
all we have offered thee for this ship on our embarcation; and grant, O
King, that with a prosperous wind I may loose the hawsers, relying on
thy counsel, and may the breeze blow softly with which we shall sail
over the sea in fair weather."

(ll. 425-439) He spake, and with his prayer cast the barley meal.
And they two girded themselves to slay the steers, proud Ancaeus and
Heracles. The latter with his club smote one steer mid-head on the brow,
and falling in a heap on the spot, it sank to the ground; and Ancaeus
struck the broad neck of the other with his axe of bronze, and shore
through the mighty sinews; and it fell prone on both its horns. Their
comrades quickly severed the victims' throats, and flayed the hides:
they sundered the joints and carved the flesh, then cut out the sacred
thigh bones, and covering them all together closely with fat burnt them
upon cloven wood. And Aeson's son poured out pure libations, and Idmon
rejoiced beholding the flame as it gleamed on every side from the
sacrifice, and the smoke of it mounting up with good omen in dark spiral
columns; and quickly he spake outright the will of Leto's son:

(ll. 440-447) "For you it is the will of heaven and destiny that
ye shall return here with the fleece; but meanwhile both going and
returning, countless trials await you. But it is my lot, by the hateful
decree of a god, to die somewhere afar off on the mainland of Asia.
Thus, though I learnt my fate from evil omens even before now, I have
left my fatherland to embark on the ship, that so after my embarking
fair fame may be left me in my house."

(ll. 448-462) Thus he spake; and the youths hearing the divine utterance
rejoiced at their return, but grief seized them for the fate of
Idmon. Now at the hour when the sun passes his noon-tide halt and the
ploughlands are just being shadowed by the rocks, as the sun slopes
towards the evening dusk, at that hour all the heroes spread leaves
thickly upon the sand and lay down in rows in front of the hoary
surf-line; and near them were spread vast stores of viands and sweet
wine, which the cupbearers had drawn off in pitchers; afterwards they
told tales one to another in turn, such as youths often tell when at
the feast and the bowl they take delightful pastime, and insatiable
insolence is far away. But here the son of Aeson, all helpless, was
brooding over each event in his mind, like one oppressed with thought.
And Idas noted him and assailed him with loud voice:

(ll. 463-471) "Son of Aeson, what is this plan thou art turning over in
mind. Speak out thy thought in the midst. Does fear come on and master
thee, fear, that confounds cowards? Be witness now my impetuous spear,
wherewith in wars I win renown beyond all others (nor does Zeus aid me
so much as my own spear), that no woe will be fatal, no venture will be
unachieved, while Idas follows, even though a god should oppose thee.
Such a helpmeet am I that thou bringest from Arene."

(ll. 472-475) He spake, and holding a brimming goblet in both hands
drank off the unmixed sweet wine; and his lips and dark cheeks were
drenched with it; and all the heroes clamoured together and Idmon spoke
out openly:

(ll. 480-484) "Vain wretch, thou art devising destruction for thyself
before the time. Does the pure wine cause thy bold heart to swell in thy
breast to thy ruin, and has it set thee on to dishonour the gods? Other
words of comfort there are with which a man might encourage his comrade;
but thou hast spoken with utter recklessness. Such taunts, the tale
goes, did the sons of Aloeus once blurt out against the blessed gods,
and thou dost no wise equal them in valour; nevertheless they were both
slain by the swift arrows of Leto's son, mighty though they were."

(ll. 485-486) Thus he spake, and Aphareian Iclas laughed out, loud and
long, and eyeing him askance replied with biting words:

(ll. 487-491) "Come now, tell me this by thy prophetic art, whether for
me too the gods will bring to pass such doom as thy father promised for
the sons of Aloeus. And bethink thee how thou wilt escape from my hands
alive, if thou art caught making a prophecy vain as the idle wind."

(ll. 492-495) Thus in wrath Idas reviled him, and the strife would
have gone further had not their comrades and Aeson's son himself with
indignant cry restrained the contending chiefs; and Orpheus lifted his
lyre in his left hand and made essay to sing.

(ll. 496-511) He sang how the earth, the heaven and the sea, once
mingled together in one form, after deadly strife were separated each
from other; and how the stars and the moon and the paths of the sun ever
keep their fixed place in the sky; and how the mountains rose, and how
the resounding rivers with their nymphs came into being and all creeping
things. And he sang how first of all Ophion and Eurynome, daughter of
Ocean, held the sway of snowy Olympus, and how through strength of arm
one yielded his prerogative to Cronos and the other to Rhea, and how
they fell into the waves of Ocean; but the other two meanwhile ruled
over the blessed Titan-gods, while Zeus, still a child and with the
thoughts of a child, dwelt in the Dictaean cave; and the earthborn
Cyclopes had not yet armed him with the bolt, with thunder and
lightning; for these things give renown to Zeus.

(ll. 512-518) He ended, and stayed his lyre and divine voice. But though
he had ceased they still bent forward with eagerness all hushed to
quiet, with ears intent on the enchanting strain; such a charm of song
had he left behind in their hearts. Not long after they mixed libations
in honour of Zeus, with pious rites as is customary, and poured them
upon the burning tongues, and bethought them of sleep in the darkness.

(ll. 519-558) Now when gleaming dawn with bright eyes beheld the lofty
peaks of Pelion, and the calm headlands were being drenched as the sea
was ruffled by the winds, then Tiphys awoke from sleep; and at once
he roused his comrades to go on board and make ready the oars. And
a strange cry did the harbour of Pagasae utter, yea and Pelian Argo
herself, urging them to set forth. For in her a beam divine had been
laid which Athena had brought from an oak of Dodona and fitted in the
middle of the stem. And the heroes went to the benches one after the
other, as they had previously assigned for each to row in his place, and
took their seats in due order near their fighting gear. In the middle
sat Antaeus and mighty Heracles, and near him he laid his club, and
beneath his tread the ship's keel sank deep. And now the hawsers were
being slipped and they poured wine on the sea. But Jason with tears held
his eyes away from his fatherland. And just as youths set up a dance in
honour of Phoebus either in Pytho or haply in Ortygia, or by the waters
of Ismenus, and to the sound of the lyre round his altar all together
in time beat the earth with swiftly-moving feet; so they to the sound of
Orpheus' lyre smote with their oars the rushing sea-water, and the
surge broke over the blades; and on this side and on that the dark brine
seethed with foam, boiling terribly through the might of the sturdy
heroes. And their arms shone in the sun like flame as the ship sped on;
and ever their wake gleamed white far behind, like a path seen over a
green plain. On that day all the gods looked down from heaven upon the
ship and the might of the heroes, half-divine, the bravest of men
then sailing the sea; and on the topmost heights the nymphs of Pelion
wondered as they beheld the work of Itonian Athena, and the heroes
themselves wielding the oars. And there came down from the mountain-top
to the sea Chiron, son of Philyra, and where the white surf broke he
dipped his feet, and, often waving with his broad hand, cried out to
them at their departure, "Good speed and a sorrowless home-return!" And
with him his wife, bearing Peleus' son Achilles on her arm, showed the
child to his dear father.

(ll. 559-579) Now when they had left the curving shore of the harbour
through the cunning and counsel of prudent Tiphys son of Hagnias,
who skilfully handled the well-polished helm that he might guide them
steadfastly, then at length they set up the tall mast in the mastbox,
and secured it with forestays, drawing them taut on each side, and from
it they let down the sail when they had hauled it to the top-mast. And
a breeze came down piping shrilly; and upon the deck they fastened the
ropes separately round the well-polished pins, and ran quietly past the
long Tisaean headland. And for them the son of Oeagrus touched his lyre
and sang in rhythmical song of Artemis, saviour of ships, child of a
glorious sire, who hath in her keeping those peaks by the sea, and the
land of Iolcos; and the fishes came darting through the deep sea, great
mixed with small, and followed gambolling along the watery paths. And as
when in the track of the shepherd, their master, countless sheep follow
to the fold that have fed to the full of grass, and he goes before
gaily piping a shepherd's strain on Iris shrill reed; so these fishes
followed; and a chasing breeze ever bore the ship onward.

(ll. 580-591) And straightway the misty land of the Pelasgians, rich in
cornfields, sank out of sight, and ever speeding onward they passed the
rugged sides of Pelion; and the Sepian headland sank away, and Sciathus
appeared in the sea, and far off appeared Piresiae and the calm shore
of Magnesia on the mainland and the tomb of Dolops; here then in the
evening, as the wind blew against them, they put to land, and paying
honour to him at nightfall burnt sheep as victims, while the sea was
tossed by the swell: and for two days they lingered on the shore, but on
the third day they put forth the ship, spreading on high the broad sail.
And even now men call that beach Aphetae [1104] of Argo.

(ll. 592-608) Thence going forward they ran past Meliboea, escaping a
stormy beach and surf-line. And in the morning they saw Homole close at
hand leaning on the sea, and skirted it, and not long after they were
about to pass by the outfall of the river Amyrus. From there they beheld
Eurymenae and the seawashed ravines of Ossa and Olympus; next they
reached the slopes of Pallene, beyond the headland of Canastra, running
all night with the wind. And at dawn before them as they journeyed rose
Athos, the Thracian mountain, which with its topmost peak overshadows
Lemnos, even as far as Myrine, though it lies as far off as the space
that a well-trimmed merchantship would traverse up to mid-day. For them
on that day, till darkness fell, the breeze blew exceedingly fresh, and
the sails of the ship strained to it. But with the setting of the sun
the wind left them, and it was by the oars that they reached Lemnos, the
Sintian isle.

(ll. 609-639) Here the whole of the men of the people together had been
ruthlessly slain through the transgressions of the women in the year
gone by. For the men had rejected their lawful wives, loathing them, and
had conceived a fierce passion for captive maids whom they themselves
brought across the sea from their forays in Thrace; for the terrible
wrath of Cypris came upon them, because for a long time they had grudged
her the honours due. O hapless women, and insatiate in jealousy to their
own ruin! Not their husbands alone with the captives did they slay on
account of the marriage-bed, but all the males at the same time, that
they might thereafter pay no retribution for the grim murder. And of all
the women, Hypsipyle alone spared her aged father Thoas, who was king
over the people; and she sent him in a hollow chest, to drift over the
sea, if haply he should escape. And fishermen dragged him to shore at
the island of Oenoe, formerly Oenoe, but afterwards called Sicinus from
Sicinus, whom the water-nymph Oenoe bore to Thoas. Now for all the
women to tend kine, to don armour of bronze, and to cleave with the
plough-share the wheat-bearing fields, was easier than the works of
Athena, with which they were busied aforetime. Yet for all that did they
often gaze over the broad sea, in grievous fear against the Thracians'
coming. So when they saw Argo being rowed near the island, straightway
crowding in multitude from the gates of Myrine and clad in their harness
of war, they poured forth to the beach like ravening Thyiades: for they
deemed that the Thracians were come; and with them Hypsipyle, daughter
of Thoas, donned her father's harness. And they streamed down speechless
with dismay; such fear was wafted about them.

(ll. 640-652) Meantime from the ship the chiefs had sent Aethalides the
swift herald, to whose care they entrusted their messages and the wand
of Hermes, his sire, who had granted him a memory of all things, that
never grew dim; and not even now, though he has entered the unspeakable
whirlpools of Acheron, has forgetfulness swept over his soul, but its
fixed doom is to be ever changing its abode; at one time to be numbered
among the dwellers beneath the earth, at another to be in the light
of the sun among living men. But why need I tell at length tales
of Aethalides? He at that time persuaded Hypsipyle to receive the
new-comers as the day was waning into darkness; nor yet at dawn did they
loose the ship's hawsers to the breath of the north wind.

(ll. 653-656) Now the Lemnian women fared through the city and sat down
to the assembly, for Hypsipyle herself had so bidden. And when they were
all gathered together in one great throng straightway she spake among
them with stirring words:

(ll. 657-666) "O friends, come let us grant these men gifts to
their hearts' desire, such as it is fitting that they should take on
ship-board, food and sweet wine, in order that they may steadfastly
remain outside our towers, and may not, passing among us for need's
sake, get to know us all too well, and so an evil report be widely
spread; for we have wrought a terrible deed and in nowise will it be to
their liking, should they learn it. Such is our counsel now, but if any
of you can devise a better plan let her rise, for it was on this account
that I summoned you hither."

(ll. 667-674) Thus she spake and sat upon her father's seat of stone,
and then rose up her dear nurse Polyxo, for very age halting upon her
withered feet, bowed over a staff, and she was eager to address them.
Near her were seated four virgins, unwedded, crowned with white hair.
And she stood in the midst of the assembly and from her bent back she
feebly raised her neck and spake thus:

(ll. 675-696) "Gifts, as Hypsipyle herself wishes, let us send to the
strangers, for it is better to give them. But for you what device have
ye to get profit of your life if the Thracian host fall upon us, or some
other foe, as often happens among men, even as now this company is come
unforeseen? But if one of the blessed gods should turn this aside yet
countless other woes, worse than battle, remain behind, when the aged
women die off and ye younger ones, without children, reach hateful old
age. How then will ye live, hapless ones? Will your oxen of their
own accord yoke themselves for the deep plough-lands and draw the
earth-cleaving share through the fallow, and forthwith, as the year
comes round, reap the harvest? Assuredly, though the fates till now have
shunned me in horror, I deem that in the coming year I shall put on the
garment of earth, when I have received my meed of burial even so as is
right, before the evil days draw near. But I bid you who are younger
give good heed to this. For now at your feet a way of escape lies open,
if ye trust to the strangers the care of your homes and all your stock
and your glorious city."

(ll. 697-699) Thus she spake, and the assembly was filled with clamour.
For the word pleased them. And after her straightway Hypsipyle rose up
again, and thus spake in reply.

(ll. 700-701) "If this purpose please you all, now will I even send a
messenger to the ship."

(ll. 702-707) She spake and addressed Iphinoe close at hand: "Go,
Iphinoe, and beg yonder man, whoever it is that leads this array, to
come to our land that I may tell him a word that pleases the heart of my
people, and bid the men themselves, if they wish, boldly enter the land
and the city with friendly intent."

(ll. 708-711) She spake, and dismissed the assembly, and thereafter
started to return home. And so Iphinoe came to the Minyae; and they
asked with what intent she had come among them. And quickly she
addressed her questioners with all speed in these words:

(ll. 712-716) "The maiden Hypsipyle daughter of Thoas, sent me on my way
here to you, to summon the captain of your ship, whoever he be, that she
may tell him a word that pleases the heart of the people, and she bids
yourselves, if ye wish it, straightway enter the land and the city with
friendly intent."

(ll. 717-720) Thus she spake and the speech of good omen pleased all.
And they deemed that Thoas was dead and that his beloved daughter
Hypsipyle was queen, and quickly they sent Jason on his way and
themselves made ready to go.

(ll. 721-729) Now he had buckled round his shoulders a purple mantle of
double fold, the work of the Tritonian goddess, which Pallas had given
him when she first laid the keel-props of the ship Argo and taught him
how to measure timbers with the rule. More easily wouldst thou cast thy
eyes upon the sun at its rising than behold that blazing splendour. For
indeed in the middle the fashion thereof was red, but at the ends it was
all purple, and on each margin many separate devices had been skilfully
inwoven.

(ll. 730-734) In it were the Cyclops seated at their imperishable work,
forging a thunderbolt for King Zeus; by now it was almost finished in
its brightness and still it wanted but one ray, which they were beating
out with their iron hammers as it spurted forth a breath of raging
flame.

(ll. 735-741) In it too were the twin sons of Antiope, daughter of
Asopus, Amphion and Zethus, and Thebe still ungirt with towers was
lying near, whose foundations they were just then laying in eager haste.
Zethus on his shoulders was lifting the peak of a steep mountain, like
a man toiling hard, and Amphion after him, singing loud and clear on his
golden lyre, moved on, and a rock twice as large followed his footsteps.

(ll. 742-746) Next in order had been wrought Cytherea with drooping
tresses, wielding the swift shield of Ares; and from her shoulder to her
left arm the fastening of her tunic was loosed beneath her breast; and
opposite in the shield of bronze her image appeared clear to view as she
stood.

(ll. 747-751) And in it there was a well-wooded pasturage of oxen; and
about the oxen the Teleboae and the sons of Eleetryon were fighting; the
one party defending themselves, the others, the Taphian raiders, longing
to rob them; and the dewy meadow was drenched with their blood, and the
many were overmastering the few herdsmen.

(ll. 752-758) And therein were fashioned two chariots, racing, and the
one in front Pelops was guiding, as he shook the reins, and with him was
Hippodameia at his side, and in pursuit Myrtilus urged his steeds, and
with him Oenomaus had grasped his couched spear, but fell as the axle
swerved and broke in the nave, while he was eager to pierce the back of
Pelops.

(ll. 759-762) And in it was wrought Phoebus Apollo, a stripling not
yet grown up, in the act of shooting at mighty Tityos who was boldly
dragging his mother by her veil, Tityos whom glorious Elate bare, but
Earth nursed him and gave him second birth.

(ll. 763-767) And in it was Phrixus the Minyan as though he were in very
deed listening to the ram, while it was like one speaking. Beholding
them thou wouldst be silent and wouldst cheat thy soul with the hope of
hearing some wise speech from them, and long wouldst thou gaze with that
hope.

(ll. 768-773) Such then were the gifts of the Tritonian goddess Athena.
And in his right hand Jason held a fardarting spear, which Atalanta gave
him once as a gift of hospitality in Maenalus as she met him gladly; for
she eagerly desired to follow on that quest; but he himself of his own
accord prevented the maid, for he feared bitter strife on account of her
love.

(ll. 774-792) And he went on his way to the city like to a bright star,
which maidens, pent up in new-built chambers, behold as it rises above
their homes, and through the dark air it charms their eyes with its fair
red gleam and the maid rejoices, love-sick for the youth who is far away
amid strangers, for whom her parents are keeping her to be his bride;
like to that star the hero trod the way to the city. And when they had
passed within the gates and the city, the women of the people surged
behind them, delighting in the stranger, but he with his eyes fixed on
the ground fared straight on, till he reached the glorious palace of
Hypsipyle; and when he appeared the maids opened the folding doors,
fitted with well-fashioned panels. Here Iphinoe leading him quickly
through a fair porch set him upon a shining seat opposite her mistress,
but Hypsipyle turned her eyes aside and a blush covered her maiden
cheeks, yet for all her modesty she addressed him with crafty words:

(ll. 793-833) "Stranger, why stay ye so long outside our towers? for the
city is not inhabited by the men, but they, as sojourners, plough the
wheat-bearing fields of the Thracian mainland. And I will tell out truly
all our evil plight, that ye yourselves too may know it well. When my
father Thoas reigned over the citizens, then our folk starting from
their homes used to plunder from their ships the dwellings of the
Thracians who live opposite, and they brought back hither measureless
booty and maidens too. But the counsel of the baneful goddess Cypris was
working out its accomplishment, who brought upon them soul destroying
infatuation. For they hated their lawful wives, and, yielding to their
own mad folly, drove them from their homes; and they took to their beds
the captives of their spear, cruel ones. Long in truth we endured it, if
haply again, though late, they might change their purpose, but ever the
bitter woe grew, twofold. And the lawful children were being dishonoured
in their halls, and a bastard race was rising. And thus unmarried
maidens and widowed mothers too wandered uncared for through the city;
no father heeded his daughter ever so little even though he should see
her done to death before his eyes at the hands of an insolent step-dame,
nor did sons, as before, defend their mother against unseemly outrage;
nor did brothers care at heart for their sister. But in their homes, in
the dance, in the assembly and the banquet all their thought was only
for their captive maidens; until some god put desperate courage in our
hearts no more to receive our lords on their return from Thrace within
our towers so that they might either heed the right or might depart and
begone elsewhither, they and their captives. So they begged of us all
the male children that were left in the city and went back to where even
now they dwell on the snowy tilths of Thrace. Do ye therefore stay and
settle with us; and shouldst thou desire to dwell here, and this finds
favour with thee, assuredly thou shalt have the prerogative of my father
Thoas; and I deem that thou wilt not scorn our land at all; for it is
deepsoiled beyond all other islands that lie in the Aegaean sea. But
come now, return to the ship and relate my words to thy comrades, and
stay not outside our city."

(ll. 834-835) She spoke, glozing over the murder that had been wrought
upon the men; and Jason addressed her in answer:

(ll. 836-841) "Hypsipyle, very dear to our hearts is the help we shall
meet with, which thou grantest to us who need thee. And I will return
again to the city when I have told everything in order due. But let the
sovereignty of the island be thine; it is not in scorn I yield it up,
but grievous trials urge me on."

(ll. 842-852) He spake, and touched her right hand; and quickly he
turned to go back: and round him the young maids on every side danced
in countless numbers in their joy till he passed through the gates. And
then they came to the shore in smooth-running wains, bearing with them
many gifts, when now he had related from beginning to end the speech
which Hypsipyle had spoken when she summoned them; and the maids readily
led the men back to their homes for entertainment. For Cypris stirred
in them a sweet desire, for the sake of Hephaestus of many counsels, in
order that Lemnos might be again inhabited by men and not be ruined.

(ll. 853-864) Thereupon Aeson's son started to go to the royal home of
Hypsipyle; and the rest went each his way as chance took them, all but
Heracles; for he of his own will was left behind by the ship and a few
chosen comrades with him. And straightway the city rejoiced with dances
and banquets, being filled with the steam of sacrifice; and above all
the immortals they propitiated with songs and sacrifices the illustrious
son of Hera and Cypris herself. And the sailing was ever delayed from
one day to another; and long would they have lingered there, had not
Heracles, gathering together his comrades apart from the women, thus
addressed them with reproachful words:

(ll. 865-874) "Wretched men, does the murder of kindred keep us from our
native land? Or is it in want of marriage that we have come hither from
thence, in scorn of our countrywomen? Does it please us to dwell here
and plough the rich soil of Lemnos? No fair renown shall we win by thus
tarrying so long with stranger women; nor will some god seize and give
us at our prayer a fleece that moves of itself. Let us then return each
to his own; but him leave ye to rest all day long in the embrace of
Hypsipyle until he has peopled Lemnos with men-children, and so there
come to him great glory."

(ll. 875-887) Thus did he chide the band; but no one dared to meet his
eye or to utter a word in answer. But just as they were in the assembly
they made ready their departure in all haste, and the women came running
towards them, when they knew their intent. And as when bees hum round
fair lilies pouring forth from their hive in the rock, and all around
the dewy meadow rejoices, and they gather the sweet fruit, flitting from
one to another; even so the women eagerly poured forth clustering round
the men with loud lament, and greeted each one with hands and voice,
praying the blessed gods to grant him a safe return. And so Hypsipyle
too prayed, seizing the hands of Aeson's son, and her tears flowed for
the loss of her lover:

(ll. 888-898) "Go, and may heaven bring thee back again with thy
comrades unharmed, bearing to the king the golden fleece, even as thou
wilt and thy heart desireth; and this island and my father's sceptre
will be awaiting thee, if on thy return hereafter thou shouldst choose
to come hither again; and easily couldst thou gather a countless host
of men from other cities. But thou wilt not have this desire, nor do I
myself forbode that so it will be. Still remember Hypsipyle when thou
art far away and when thou hast returned; and leave me some word of
bidding, which I will gladly accomplish, if haply heaven shall grant me
to be a mother."

(ll. 899-909) And Aeson's son in admiration thus replied: "Hypsipyle, so
may all these things prove propitious by the favour of the blessed gods.
But do thou hold a nobler thought of me, since by the grace of Pelias it
is enough for me to dwell in my native land; may the gods only release
me from my toils. But if it is not my destiny to sail afar and return
to the land of Hellas, and if thou shouldst bear a male child, send him
when grown up to Pelasgian Iolcus, to heal the grief of my father and
mother if so be that he find them still living, in order that, far away
from the king, they may be cared for by their own hearth in their home."

(ll. 910-921) He spake, and mounted the ship first of all; and so the
rest of the chiefs followed, and, sitting in order, seized the oars;
and Argus loosed for them the hawsers from under the sea-beaten rock.
Whereupon they mightily smote the water with their long oars, and in
the evening by the injunctions of Orpheus they touched at the island of
Electra, [1105] daughter of Atlas, in order that by gentle initiation
they might learn the rites that may not be uttered, and so with greater
safety sail over the chilling sea. Of these I will make no further
mention; but I bid farewell to the island itself and the indwelling
deities, to whom belong those mysteries, which it is not lawful for me
to sing.

(ll. 922-935) Thence did they row with eagerness over the depths of
the black Sea, having on the one side the land of the Thracians, on the
other Imbros on the south; and as the sun was just setting they reached
the foreland of the Chersonesus. There a strong south wind blew for
them; and raising the sails to the breeze they entered the swift stream
of the maiden daughter of Athamas; and at dawn the sea to the north was
left behind and at night they were coasting inside the Rhoeteian shore,
with the land of Ida on their right. And leaving Dardania they directed
their course to Abydus, and after it they sailed past Percote and the
sandy beach of Abarnis and divine Pityeia. And in that night, as the
ship sped on by sail and oar, they passed right through the Hellespont
dark-gleaming with eddies.

(ll. 936-960) There is a lofty island inside the Propontis, a short
distance from the Phrygian mainland with its rich cornfields, sloping
to the sea, where an isthmus in front of the mainland is flooded by the
waves, so low does it lie. And the isthmus has double shores, and they
lie beyond the river Aesepus, and the inhabitants round about call the
island the Mount of Bears. And insolent and fierce men dwell there,
Earthborn, a great marvel to the neighbours to behold; for each one has
six mighty hands to lift up, two from his sturdy shoulders, and four
below, fitting close to his terrible sides. And about the isthmus and
the plain the Doliones had their dwelling, and over them Cyzicus son of
Aeneus was king, whom Aenete the daughter of goodly Eusorus bare. But
these men the Earthborn monsters, fearful though they were, in nowise
harried, owing to the protection of Poseidon; for from him had the
Doliones first sprung. Thither Argo pressed on, driven by the winds of
Thrace, and the Fair haven received her as she sped. There they cast
away their small anchorstone by the advice of Tiphys and left it beneath
a fountain, the fountain of Artaeie; and they took another meet for
their purpose, a heavy one; but the first, according to the oracle of
the Far-Darter, the Ionians, sons of Neleus, in after days laid to be a
sacred stone, as was right, in the temple of Jasonian Athena.

(ll. 961-988) Now the Doliones and Cyzicus himself all came together to
meet them with friendliness, and when they knew of the quest and their
lineage welcomed them with hospitality, and persuaded them to row
further and to fasten their ship's hawsers at the city harbour. Here
they built an altar to Ecbasian Apollo [1106] and set it up on the
beach, and gave heed to sacrifices. And the king of his own bounty gave
them sweet wine and sheep in their need; for he had heard a report that
whenever a godlike band of heroes should come, straightway he should
meet it with gentle words and should have no thought of war. As with
Jason, the soft down was just blooming on his chin, nor yet had it been
his lot to rejoice in children, but still in his palace his wife was
untouched by the pangs of child-birth, the daughter of Percosian Merops,
fair-haired Cleite, whom lately by priceless gifts he had brought from
her father's home from the mainland opposite. But even so he left his
chamber and bridal bed and prepared a banquet among the strangers,
casting all fears from his heart. And they questioned one another in
turn. Of them would he learn the end of their voyage and the injunctions
of Pelias; while they enquired about the cities of the people round and
all the gulf of the wide Propontis; but further he could not tell
them for all their desire to learn. In the morning they climbed mighty
Dindymum that they might themselves behold the various paths of that
sea; and they brought their ship from its former anchorage to the
harbour, Chytus; and the path they trod is named the path of Jason.

(ll. 989-1011) But the Earthborn men on the other side rushed down from
the mountain and with crags below blocked up the mouth of vast Chytus
towards the sea, like men lying in wait for a wild beast within. But
there Heracles had been left behind with the younger heroes and he
quickly bent his back-springing bow against the monsters and brought
them to earth one after another; and they in their turn raised huge
ragged rocks and hurled them. For these dread monsters too, I ween, the
goddess Hera, bride of Zeus, had nurtured to be a trial for Heracles.
And therewithal came the rest of the martial heroes returning to meet
the foe before they reached the height of outlook, and they fell to the
slaughter of the Earthborn, receiving them with arrows and spears
until they slew them all as they rushed fiercely to battle. And as when
woodcutters cast in rows upon the beach long trees just hewn down by
their axes, in order that, once sodden with brine, they may receive
the strong bolts; so these monsters at the entrance of the foam-fringed
harbour lay stretched one after another, some in heaps bending their
heads and breasts into the salt waves with their limbs spread out above
on the land; others again were resting their heads on the sand of the
shore and their feet in the deep water, both alike a prey to birds and
fishes at once.

(ll. 1012-1076) But the heroes, when the contest was ended without
fear, loosed the ship's hawsers to the breath of the wind and pressed on
through the sea-swell. And the ship sped on under sail all day; but when
night came the rushing wind did not hold steadfast, but contrary blasts
caught them and held them back till they again approached the hospitable
Doliones. And they stepped ashore that same night; and the rock is still
called the Sacred Rock round which they threw the ship's hawsers in
their haste. Nor did anyone note with care that it was the same island;
nor in the night did the Doliones clearly perceive that the heroes were
returning; but they deemed that Pelasgian war-men of the Macrians
had landed. Therefore they donned their armour and raised their hands
against them. And with clashing of ashen spears and shields they fell on
each other, like the swift rush of fire which falls on dry brushwood and
rears its crest; and the din of battle, terrible and furious, fell upon
the people of the Doliones. Nor was the king to escape his fate and
return home from battle to his bridal chamber and bed. But Aeson's son
leapt upon him as he turned to face him, and smote him in the middle
of the breast, and the bone was shattered round the spear; he rolled
forward in the sand and filled up the measure of his fate. For that no
mortal may escape; but on every side a wide snare encompasses us. And
so, when he thought that he had escaped bitter death from the chiefs,
fate entangled him that very night in her toils while battling with
them; and many champions withal were slain; Heracles killed Telecles
and Megabrontes, and Acastus slew Sphodris; and Peleus slew Zelus and
Gephyrus swift in war. Telamon of the strong spear slew Basileus. And
Idas slew Promeus, and Clytius Hyacinthus, and the two sons of Tyndareus
slew Megalossaces and Phlogius. And after them the son of Oeneus slew
bold Itomeneus, and Artaceus, leader of men; all of whom the inhabitants
still honour with the worship due to heroes. And the rest gave way and
fled in terror just as doves fly in terror before swift-winged hawks.
And with a din they rustled in a body to the gates; and quickly the city
was filled with loud cries at the turning of the dolorous fight. But at
dawn both sides perceived the fatal and cureless error; and bitter grief
seized the Minyan heroes when they saw before them Cyzicus son of Aeneus
fallen in the midst of dust and blood. And for three whole days they
lamented and rent their hair, they and the Dollones. Then three times
round his tomb they paced in armour of bronze and performed funeral
rites and celebrated games, as was meet, upon the meadow-plain, where
even now rises the mound of his grave to be seen by men of a later day.
No, nor was his bride Cleite left behind her dead husband, but to crown
the ill she wrought an ill yet more awful, when she clasped a noose
round her neck. Her death even the nymphs of the grove bewailed; and
of all the tears for her that they shed to earth from their eyes
the goddesses made a fountain, which they call Cleite, [1107] the
illustrious name of the hapless maid. Most terrible came that day from
Zeus upon the Doliones, women and men; for no one of them dared even to
taste food, nor for a long time by reason of grief did they take thought
for the toil of the cornmill, but they dragged on their lives eating
their food as it was, untouched by fire. Here even now, when the Ionians
that dwell in Cyzicus pour their yearly libations for the dead, they
ever grind the meal for the sacrificial cakes at the common mill. [1108]

(ll. 1079-1091) After this, fierce tempests arose for twelve days and
nights together and kept them there from sailing. But in the next night
the rest of the chieftains, overcome by sleep, were resting during the
latest period of the night, while Acastus and Mopsus the son of Ampyeus
kept guard over their deep slumbers. And above the golden head of
Aeson's son there hovered a halcyon prophesying with shrill voice the
ceasing of the stormy winds; and Mopsus heard and understood the cry of
the bird of the shore, fraught with good omen. And some god made it turn
aside, and flying aloft it settled upon the stern-ornament of the ship.
And the seer touched Jason as he lay wrapped in soft sheepskins and woke
him at once, and thus spake:

(ll. 1092-1102) "Son of Aeson, thou must climb to this temple on rugged
Dindymum and propitiate the mother [1109] of all the blessed gods on her
fair throne, and the stormy blasts shall cease. For such was the voice I
heard but now from the halcyon, bird of the sea, which, as it flew above
thee in thy slumber, told me all. For by her power the winds and the sea
and all the earth below and the snowy seat of Olympus are complete;
and to her, when from the mountains she ascends the mighty heaven, Zeus
himself, the son of Cronos, gives place. In like manner the rest of the
immortal blessed ones reverence the dread goddess."

(ll. 1103-1152) Thus he spake, and his words were welcome to Jason's
ear. And he arose from his bed with joy and woke all his comrades
hurriedly and told them the prophecy of Mopsus the son of Ampycus. And
quickly the younger men drove oxen from their stalls and began to lead
them to the mountain's lofty summit. And they loosed the hawsers from
the sacred rock and rowed to the Thracian harbour; and the heroes
climbed the mountain, leaving a few of their comrades in the ship.
And to them the Macrian heights and all the coast of Thrace opposite
appeared to view close at hand. And there appeared the misty mouth of
Bosporus and the Mysian hills; and on the other side the stream of the
river Aesepus and the city and Nepeian plain of Adrasteia. Now there was
a sturdy stump of vine that grew in the forest, a tree exceeding old;
this they cut down, to be the sacred image of the mountain goddess;
and Argus smoothed it skilfully, and they set it upon that rugged hill
beneath a canopy of lofty oaks, which of all trees have their roots
deepest. And near it they heaped an altar of small stones, and wreathed
their brows with oak leaves and paid heed to sacrifice, invoking the
mother of Dindymum, most venerable, dweller in Phrygia, and Titias and
Cyllenus, who alone of many are called dispensers of doom and assessors
of the Idaean mother,--the Idaean Dactyls of Crete, whom once the nymph
Anchiale, as she grasped with both hands the land of Oaxus, bare in the
Dictaean cave. And with many prayers did Aeson's son beseech the goddess
to turn aside the stormy blasts as he poured libations on the blazing
sacrifice; and at the same time by command of Orpheus the youths trod a
measure dancing in full armour, and clashed with their swords on their
shields, so that the ill-omened cry might be lost in the air the wail
which the people were still sending up in grief for their king. Hence
from that time forward the Phrygians propitiate Rhea with the wheel and
the drum. And the gracious goddess, I ween, inclined her heart to pious
sacrifices; and favourable signs appeared. The trees shed abundant
fruit, and round their feet the earth of its own accord put forth
flowers from the tender grass. And the beasts of the wild wood left
their lairs and thickets and came up fawning on them with their tails.
And she caused yet another marvel; for hitherto there was no flow of
water on Dindymum, but then for them an unceasing stream gushed forth
from the thirsty peak just as it was, and the dwellers around in after
times called that stream, the spring of Jason. And then they made
a feast in honour of the goddess on the Mount of Bears, singing the
praises of Rhea most venerable; but at dawn the winds had ceased and
they rowed away from the island.

(ll. 1153-1171) Thereupon a spirit of contention stirred each chieftain,
who should be the last to leave his oar. For all around the windless
air smoothed the swirling waves and lulled the sea to rest. And they,
trusting in the calm, mightily drove the ship forward; and as she sped
through the salt sea, not even the storm-footed steeds of Poseidon would
have overtaken her. Nevertheless when the sea was stirred by violent
blasts which were just rising from the rivers about evening, forspent
with toil, they ceased. But Heracles by the might of his arms pulled the
weary rowers along all together, and made the strong-knit timbers of
the ship to quiver. But when, eager to reach the Mysian mainland, they
passed along in sight of the mouth of Rhyndaeus and the great cairn of
Aegaeon, a little way from Phrygia, then Heracles, as he ploughed up
the furrows of the roughened surge, broke his oar in the middle. And one
half he held in both his hands as he fell sideways, the other the sea
swept away with its receding wave. And he sat up in silence glaring
round; for his hands were unaccustomed to be idle.

(ll. 1172-1186) Now at the hour when from the field some delver or
ploughman goes gladly home to his hut, longing for his evening meal, and
there on the threshold, all squalid with dust, bows his wearied knees,
and, beholding his hands worn with toil, with many a curse reviles his
belly; at that hour the heroes reached the homes of the Cianian land
near the Arganthonian mount and the outfall of Cius. Them as they came
in friendliness, the Mysians, inhabitants of that land, hospitably
welcomed, and gave them in their need provisions and sheep and abundant
wine. Hereupon some brought dried wood, others from the meadows leaves
for beds which they gathered in abundance for strewing, whilst others
were twirling sticks to get fire; others again were mixing wine in
the bowl and making ready the feast, after sacrificing at nightfall to
Apollo Ecbasius.

(ll. 1187-1206) But the son of Zeus having duly enjoined on his comrades
to prepare the feast took his way into a wood, that he might first
fashion for himself an oar to fit his hand. Wandering about he found a
pine not burdened with many branches, nor too full of leaves, but
like to the shaft of a tall poplar; so great was it both in length
and thickness to look at. And quickly he laid on the ground his
arrow-holding quiver together with his bow, and took off his lion's
skin. And he loosened the pine from the ground with his bronze-tipped
club and grasped the trunk with both hands at the bottom, relying on his
strength; and he pressed it against his broad shoulder with legs wide
apart; and clinging close he raised it from the ground deep-rooted
though it was, together with clods of earth. And as when unexpectedly,
just at the time of the stormy setting of baleful Orion, a swift gust of
wind strikes down from above, and wrenches a ship's mast from its stays,
wedges and all; so did Heracles lift the pine. And at the same time he
took up his bow and arrows, his lion skin and club, and started on his
return.

(ll. 1207-1239) Meantime Hylas with pitcher of bronze in hand had gone
apart from the throng, seeking the sacred flow of a fountain, that he
might be quick in drawing water for the evening meal and actively make
all things ready in due order against his lord's return. For in such
ways did Heracles nurture him from his first childhood when he had
carried him off from the house of his father, goodly Theiodamas, whom
the hero pitilessly slew among the Dryopians because he withstood him
about an ox for the plough. Theiodamas was cleaving with his plough the
soil of fallow land when he was smitten with the curse; and Heracles
bade him give up the ploughing ox against his will. For he desired to
find some pretext for war against the Dryopians for their bane, since
they dwelt there reckless of right. But these tales would lead me far
astray from my song. And quickly Hylas came to the spring which the
people who dwell thereabouts call Pegae. And the dances of the nymphs
were just now being held there; for it was the care of all the nymphs
that haunted that lovely headland ever to hymn Artemis in songs by
night. All who held the mountain peaks or glens, all they were ranged
far off guarding the woods; but one, a water-nymph was just rising from
the fair-flowing spring; and the boy she perceived close at hand with
the rosy flush of his beauty and sweet grace. For the full moon beaming
from the sky smote him. And Cypris made her heart faint, and in her
confusion she could scarcely gather her spirit back to her. But as soon
as he dipped the pitcher in the stream, leaning to one side, and the
brimming water rang loud as it poured against the sounding bronze,
straightway she laid her left arm above upon his neck yearning to kiss
his tender mouth; and with her right hand she drew down his elbow, and
plunged him into the midst of the eddy.

(ll. 1240-1256) Alone of his comrades the hero Polyphemus, son of
Eilatus, as he went forward on the path, heard the boy's cry, for he
expected the return of mighty Heracles. And he rushed after the cry,
near Pegae, like some beast of the wild wood whom the bleating of sheep
has reached from afar, and burning with hunger he follows, but does not
fall in with the flocks; for the shepherds beforehand have penned them
in the fold, but he groans and roars vehemently until he is weary.
Thus vehemently at that time did the son of Eilatus groan and wandered
shouting round the spot; and his voice rang piteous. Then quickly
drawing his great sword he started in pursuit, in fear lest the boy
should be the prey of wild beasts, or men should have lain in ambush for
him faring all alone, and be carrying him off, an easy prey. Hereupon as
he brandished his bare sword in his hand he met Heracles himself on
the path, and well he knew him as he hastened to the ship through the
darkness. And straightway he told the wretched calamity while his heart
laboured with his panting breath.

(ll. 1257-1260) "My poor friend, I shall be the first to bring thee
tidings of bitter woe. Hylas has gone to the well and has not returned
safe, but robbers have attacked and are carrying him off, or beasts are
tearing him to pieces; I heard his cry."

(ll. 1261-1272) Thus he spake; and when Heracles heard his words, sweat
in abundance poured down from his temples and the black blood boiled
beneath his heart. And in wrath he hurled the pine to the ground and
hurried along the path whither his feet bore on his impetuous soul. And
as when a bull stung by a gadfly tears along, leaving the meadows and
the marsh land, and recks not of herdsmen or herd, but presses on, now
without cheek, now standing still, and raising his broad neck he bellows
loudly, stung by the maddening fly; so he in his frenzy now would ply
his swift knees unresting, now again would cease from toil and shout
afar with loud pealing cry.

(ll. 1273-1289) But straightway the morning star rose above the topmost
peaks and the breeze swept down; and quickly did Tiphys urge them to
go aboard and avail themselves of the wind. And they embarked eagerly
forthwith; and they drew up the ship's anchors and hauled the ropes
astern. And the sails were bellied out by the wind, and far from the
coast were they joyfully borne past the Posideian headland. But at the
hour when gladsome dawn shines from heaven, rising from the east, and
the paths stand out clearly, and the dewy plains shine with a bright
gleam, then at length they were aware that unwittingly they had
abandoned those men. And a fierce quarrel fell upon them, and violent
tumult, for that they had sailed and left behind the bravest of their
comrades. And Aeson's son, bewildered by their hapless plight, said
never a word, good or bad; but sat with his heavy load of grief, eating
out his heart. And wrath seized Telamon, and thus he spake:

(ll. 1290-1295) "Sit there at thy ease, for it was fitting for thee to
leave Heracles behind; from thee the project arose, so that his glory
throughout Hellas should not overshadow thee, if so be that heaven
grants us a return home. But what pleasure is there in words? For I will
go, I only, with none of thy comrades, who have helped thee to plan this
treachery."

(ll. 1296-1314) He spake, and rushed upon Tiphys son of Hagnias; and
his eyes sparkled like flashes of ravening flame. And they would quickly
have turned back to the land of the Mysians, forcing their way through
the deep sea and the unceasing blasts of the wind, had not the two sons
of Thracian Boreas held back the son of Aeacus with harsh words. Hapless
ones, assuredly a bitter vengeance came upon them thereafter at the
hands of Heracles, because they stayed the search for him. For when they
were returning from the games over Pelias dead he slew them in sea-girt
Tenos and heaped the earth round them, and placed two columns above,
one of which, a great marvel for men to see, moves at the breath of
the blustering north wind. These things were thus to be accomplished in
after times. But to them appeared Glaucus from the depths of the sea,
the wise interpreter of divine Nereus, and raising aloft his shaggy head
and chest from his waist below, with sturdy hand he seized the ship's
keel, and then cried to the eager crew:

(ll. 1315-1325) "Why against the counsel of mighty Zeus do ye purpose
to lead bold Heracles to the city of Aeetes? At Argos it is his fate to
labour for insolent Eurystheus and to accomplish full twelve toils and
dwell with the immortals, if so be that he bring to fulfilment a few
more yet; wherefore let there be no vain regret for him. Likewise it is
destined for Polyphemus to found a glorious city at the mouth of Cius
among the Mysians and to fill up the measure of his fate in the vast
land of the Chalybes. But a goddess-nymph through love has made Hylas
her husband, on whose account those two wandered and were left behind."

(ll. 1326-1331) He spake, and with a plunge wrapped him about with the
restless wave; and round him the dark water foamed in seething eddies
and dashed against the hollow ship as it moved through the sea. And the
heroes rejoiced, and Telamon son of Aeacus came in haste to Jason, and
grasping his hand in his own embraced him with these words:

(ll. 1332-1335) "Son of Aeson, be not wroth with me, if in my folly
I have erred, for grief wrought upon me to utter a word arrogant and
intolerable. But let me give my fault to the winds and let our hearts be
joined as before."

(ll. 1336-1343) Him the son of Aeson with prudence addressed: "Good
friend, assuredly with an evil word didst thou revile me, saying before
them all that I was the wronger of a kindly man. But not for long will
I nurse bitter wrath, though indeed before I was grieved. For it was not
for flocks of sheep, no, nor for possessions that thou wast angered
to fury, but for a man, thy comrade. And I were fain thou wouldst even
champion me against another man if a like thing should ever befall me."

(ll. 1344-1357) He spake, and they sat down, united as of old. But of
those two, by the counsel of Zeus, one, Polyphemus son of Eilatus, was
destined to found and build a city among the Mysians bearing the river's
name, and the other, Heracles, to return and toil at the labours of
Eurystheus. And he threatened to lay waste the Mysian land at once,
should they not discover for him the doom of Hylas, whether living or
dead. And for him they gave pledges choosing out the noblest sons of the
people and took an oath that they would never cease from their labour of
search. Therefore to this day the people of Cius enquire for Hylas the
son of Theiodamas, and take thought for the well-built Trachis. For
there did Heracles settle the youths whom they sent from Cius as
pledges.

(ll. 1358-1362) And all day long and all night the wind bore the ship
on, blowing fresh and strong; but when dawn rose there was not even a
breath of air. And they marked a beach jutting forth from a bend of
the coast, very broad to behold, and by dint of rowing came to land at
sunrise.




BOOK II
BOOK III

(ll. 1-5) Come now, Erato, stand by my side, and say next how Jason
brought back the fleece to Iolcus aided by the love of Medea. For thou
sharest the power of Cypris, and by thy love-cares dost charm unwedded
maidens; wherefore to thee too is attached a name that tells of love.

(ll. 6-10) Thus the heroes, unobserved, were waiting in ambush amid the
thick reed-beds; but Hera and Athena took note of them, and, apart
from Zeus and the other immortals, entered a chamber and took counsel
together; and Hera first made trial of Athena:

(ll. 11-16) "Do thou now first, daughter of Zeus, give advice. What must
be done? Wilt thou devise some scheme whereby they may seize the golden
fleece of Aeetes and bear it to Hellas, or can they deceive the king
with soft words and so work persuasion? Of a truth he is terribly
overweening. Still it is right to shrink from no endeavour."

(ll. 17-21) Thus she spake, and at once Athena addressed her: "I too
was pondering such thoughts in my heart, Hera, when thou didst ask me
outright. But not yet do I think that I have conceived a scheme to aid
the courage of the heroes, though I have balanced many plans."

(ll. 22-29) She ended, and the goddesses fixed their eyes on the ground
at their feet, brooding apart; and straightway Hera was the first to
speak her thought: "Come, let us go to Cypris; let both of us accost her
and urge her to bid her son (if only he will obey) speed his shaft at
the daughter of Aeetes, the enchantress, and charm her with love for
Jason. And I deem that by her device he will bring back the fleece to
Hellas."

(ll. 30-31) Thus she spake, and the prudent plan pleased Athena, and she
addressed her in reply with gentle words:

(ll. 32-35) "Hera, my father begat me to be a stranger to the darts of
love, nor do I know any charm to work desire. But if the word pleases
thee, surely I will follow; but thou must speak when we meet her."

(ll. 36-51) So she said, and starting forth they came to the mighty
palace of Cypris, which her husband, the halt-footed god, had built for
her when first he brought her from Zeus to be his wife. And entering the
court they stood beneath the gallery of the chamber where the goddess
prepared the couch of Hephaestus. But he had gone early to his forge and
anvils to a broad cavern in a floating island where with the blast
of flame he wrought all manner of curious work; and she all alone
was sitting within, on an inlaid seat facing the door. And her white
shoulders on each side were covered with the mantle of her hair and
she was parting it with a golden comb and about to braid up the long
tresses; but when she saw the goddesses before her, she stayed and
called them within, and rose from her seat and placed them on couches.
Then she herself sat down, and with her hands gathered up the locks
still uncombed. And smiling she addressed them with crafty words:

(ll. 52-54) "Good friends, what intent, what occasion brings you here
after so long? Why have ye come, not too frequent visitors before, chief
among goddesses that ye are?"

(ll. 55-75) And to her Hera replied: "Thou dost mock us, but our hearts
are stirred with calamity. For already on the river Phasis the son of
Aeson moors his ship, he and his comrades in quest of the fleece. For
all their sakes we fear terribly (for the task is nigh at hand) but most
for Aeson's son. Him will I deliver, though he sail even to Hades to
free Ixion below from his brazen chains, as far as strength lies in
my limbs, so that Pelias may not mock at having escaped an evil
doom--Pelias who left me unhonoured with sacrifice. Moreover Jason was
greatly loved by me before, ever since at the mouth of Anaurus in flood,
as I was making trial of men's righteousness, he met me on his return
from the chase; and all the mountains and long ridged peaks were
sprinkled with snow, and from them the torrents rolling down were
rushing with a roar. And he took pity on me in the likeness of an old
crone, and raising me on his shoulders himself bore me through the
headlong tide. So he is honoured by me unceasingly; nor will Pelias pay
the penalty of his outrage, unless thou wilt grant Jason his return."

(ll. 76-82) Thus she spake, and speechlessness seized Cypris. And
beholding Hera supplicating her she felt awe, and then addressed her
with friendly words: "Dread goddess, may no viler thing than Cypris ever
be found, if I disregard thy eager desire in word or deed, whatever my
weak arms can effect; and let there be no favour in return."

(ll. 83-89) She spake, and Hera again addressed her with prudence:
"It is not in need of might or of strength that we have come. But just
quietly bid thy boy charm Aeetes' daughter with love for Jason. For if
she will aid him with her kindly counsel, easily do I think he will win
the fleece of gold and return to Iolcus, for she is full of wiles."

(ll. 90-99) Thus she spake, and Cypris addressed them both: "Hera and
Athena, he will obey you rather than me. For unabashed though he is,
there will be some slight shame in his eyes before you; but he has no
respect for me, but ever slights me in contentious mood. And, overborne
by his naughtiness, I purpose to break his ill-sounding arrows and his
bow in his very sight. For in his anger he has threatened that if I
shall not keep my hands off him while he still masters his temper, I
shall have cause to blame myself thereafter."

(ll. 100-105) So she spake, and the goddesses smiled and looked at each
other. But Cypris again spoke, vexed at heart: "To others my sorrows are
a jest; nor ought I to tell them to all; I know them too well myself.
But now, since this pleases you both, I will make the attempt and coax
him, and he will not say me nay."

(ll. 106-110) Thus she spake, and Hera took her slender hand and gently
smiling, replied: "Perform this task, Cytherea, straightway, as
thou sayest; and be not angry or contend with thy boy; he will cease
hereafter to vex thee."

(ll. 111-128) She spake, and left her seat, and Athena accompanied her
and they went forth both hastening back. And Cypris went on her way
through the glens of Olympus to find her boy. And she found him apart,
in the blooming orchard of Zeus, not alone, but with him Ganymedes, whom
once Zeus had set to dwell among the immortal gods, being enamoured of
his beauty. And they were playing for golden dice, as boys in one house
are wont to do. And already greedy Eros was holding the palm of his left
hand quite full of them under his breast, standing upright; and on
the bloom of his cheeks a sweet blush was glowing. But the other sat
crouching hard by, silent and downcast, and he had two dice left which
he threw one after the other, and was angered by the loud laughter of
Eros. And lo, losing them straightway with the former, he went off empty
handed, helpless, and noticed not the approach of Cypris. And she stood
before her boy, and laying her hand on his lips, addressed him:

(ll. 129-144) "Why dost thou smile in triumph, unutterable rogue? Hast
thou cheated him thus, and unjustly overcome the innocent child? Come,
be ready to perform for me the task I will tell thee of, and I will
give thee Zeus' all-beauteous plaything--the one which his dear nurse
Adrasteia made for him, while he still lived a child, with childish
ways, in the Idaean cave--a well-rounded ball; no better toy wilt thou
get from the hands of Hephaestus. All of gold are its zones, and round
each double seams run in a circle; but the stitches are hidden, and a
dark blue spiral overlays them all. But if thou shouldst cast it with
thy hands, lo, like a star, it sends a flaming track through the sky.
This I will give thee; and do thou strike with thy shaft and charm the
daughter of Aeetes with love for Jason; and let there be no loitering.
For then my thanks would be the slighter."

(ll. 145-150) Thus she spake, and welcome were her words to the
listening boy. And he threw down all his toys, and eagerly seizing her
robe on this side and on that, clung to the goddess. And he implored
her to bestow the gift at once; but she, facing him with kindly words,
touched his cheeks, kissed him and drew him to her, and replied with a
smile:

(ll. 151-153) "Be witness now thy dear head and mine, that surely I will
give thee the gift and deceive thee not, if thou wilt strike with thy
shaft Aeetes' daughter."

(ll. 154-166) She spoke, and he gathered up his dice, and having
well counted them all threw them into his mother's gleaming lap. And
straightway with golden baldric he slung round him his quiver from where
it leant against a tree-trunk, and took up his curved bow. And he fared
forth through the fruitful orchard of the palace of Zeus. Then he passed
through the gates of Olympus high in air; hence is a downward path from
heaven; and the twin poles rear aloft steep mountain tops the highest
crests of earth, where the risen sun grows ruddy with his first beams.
And beneath him there appeared now the life-giving earth and cities of
men and sacred streams of rivers, and now in turn mountain peaks and the
ocean all around, as he swept through the vast expanse of air.

(ll. 167-193) Now the heroes apart in ambush, in a back-water of the
river, were met in council, sitting on the benches of their ship. And
Aeson's son himself was speaking among them; and they were listening
silently in their places sitting row upon row: "My friends, what pleases
myself that will I say out; it is for you to bring about its fulfilment.
For in common is our task, and common to all alike is the right of
speech; and he who in silence withholds his thought and his counsel, let
him know that it is he alone that bereaves this band of its home-return.
Do ye others rest here in the ship quietly with your arms; but I will
go to the palace of Aeetes, taking with me the sons of Phrixus and two
comrades as well. And when I meet him I will first make trial with
words to see if he will be willing to give up the golden fleece for
friendship's sake or not, but trusting to his might will set at nought
our quest. For so, learning his frowardness first from himself, we will
consider whether we shall meet him in battle, or some other plan shall
avail us, if we refrain from the war-cry. And let us not merely
by force, before putting words to the test, deprive him of his own
possession. But first it is better to go to him and win his favour by
speech. Oftentimes, I ween, does speech accomplish at need what prowess
could hardly catty through, smoothing the path in manner befitting. And
he once welcomed noble Phrixus, a fugitive from his stepmother's wiles
and the sacrifice prepared by his father. For all men everywhere, even
the most shameless, reverence the ordinance of Zeus, god of strangers,
and regard it."

(ll. 194-209) Thus he spake, and the youths approved the words of
Aeson's son with one accord, nor was there one to counsel otherwise.
And then he summoned to go with him the sons of Phrixus, and Telamon and
Augeias; and himself took Hermes' wand; and at once they passed forth
from the ship beyond the reeds and the water to dry land, towards the
rising ground of the plain. The plain, I wis, is called Circe's; and
here in line grow many willows and osiers, on whose topmost branches
hang corpses bound with cords. For even now it is an abomination with
the Colchians to burn dead men with fire; nor is it lawful to place
them in the earth and raise a mound above, but to wrap them in untanned
oxhides and suspend them from trees far from the city. And so earth has
an equal portion with air, seeing that they bury the women; for that is
the custom of their land.

(ll. 210-259) And as they went Hera with friendly thought spread a thick
mist through the city, that they might fare to the palace of Aeetes
unseen by the countless hosts of the Colchians. But soon when from
the plain they came to the city and Aeetes' palace, then again Hera
dispersed the mist. And they stood at the entrance, marvelling at the
king's courts and the wide gates and columns which rose in ordered lines
round the walls; and high up on the palace a coping of stone rested on
brazen triglyphs. And silently they crossed the threshold. And close by
garden vines covered with green foliage were in full bloom, lifted
high in air. And beneath them ran four fountains, ever-flowing, which
Hephaestus had delved out. One was gushing with milk, one with wine,
while the third flowed with fragrant oil; and the fourth ran with water,
which grew warm at the setting of the Pleiads, and in turn at their
rising bubbled forth from the hollow rock, cold as crystal. Such then
were the wondrous works that the craftsman-god Hephaestus had fashioned
in the palace of Cytaean Aeetes. And he wrought for him bulls with feet
of bronze, and their mouths were of bronze, and from them they breathed
out a terrible flame of fire; moreover he forged a plough of unbending
adamant, all in one piece, in payment of thanks to Helios, who had taken
the god up in his chariot when faint from the Phlegraean fight. [1301]
And here an inner-court was built, and round it were many well-fitted
doors and chambers here and there, and all along on each side was
a richly-wrought gallery. And on both sides loftier buildings stood
obliquely. In one, which was the loftiest, lordly Aeetes dwelt with his
queen; and in another dwelt Apsyrtus, son of Aeetes, whom a Caucasian
nymph, Asterodeia, bare before he made Eidyia his wedded wife, the
youngest daughter of Tethys and Oceanus. And the sons of the Colchians
called him by the new name of Phaethon, [1302] because he outshone
all the youths. The other buildings the handmaidens had, and the two
daughters of Aeetes, Chalciope and Medea. Medea then [they found] going
from chamber to chamber in search of her sister, for Hera detained her
within that day; but beforetime she was not wont to haunt the palace,
but all day long was busied in Hecate's temple, since she herself was
the priestess of the goddess. And when she saw them she cried aloud,
and quickly Chalciope caught the sound; and her maids, throwing down at
their feet their yarn and their thread, rushed forth all in a throng.
And she, beholding her sons among them, raised her hands aloft through
joy; and so they likewise greeted their mother, and when they saw her
embraced her in their gladness; and she with many sobs spoke thus:

(ll. 260-267) "After all then, ye were not destined to leave me in
your heedlessness and to wander far; but fate has turned you back. Poor
wretch that I am! What a yearning for Hellas from some woeful madness
seized you at the behest of your father Phrixus. Bitter sorrows for
my heart did he ordain when dying. And why should ye go to the city of
Orchomenus, whoever this Orchomenus is, for the sake of Athamas' wealth,
leaving your mother alone to bear her grief?"

(ll. 268-274) Such were her words; and Aeetes came forth last of all
and Eidyia herself came, the queen of Aeetes, on hearing the voice of
Chalciope; and straightway all the court was filled with a throng. Some
of the thralls were busied with a mighty bull, others with the axe were
cleaving dry billets, and others heating with fire water for the baths;
nor was there one who relaxed his toil, serving the king.

(ll. 275-298) Meantime Eros passed unseen through the grey mist, causing
confusion, as when against grazing heifers rises the gadfly, which
oxherds call the breese. And quickly beneath the lintel in the porch
he strung his bow and took from the quiver an arrow unshot before,
messenger of pain. And with swift feet unmarked he passed the threshold
and keenly glanced around; and gliding close by Aeson's son he laid the
arrow-notch on the cord in the centre, and drawing wide apart with both
hands he shot at Medea; and speechless amazement seized her soul. But
the god himself flashed back again from the high-roofed hall, laughing
loud; and the bolt burnt deep down in the maiden's heart like a flame;
and ever she kept darting bright glances straight up at Aeson's son, and
within her breast her heart panted fast through anguish, all remembrance
left her, and her soul melted with the sweet pain. And as a poor woman
heaps dry twigs round a blazing brand--a daughter of toil, whose task is
the spinning of wool, that she may kindle a blaze at night beneath her
roof, when she has waked very early--and the flame waxing wondrous great
from the small brand consumes all the twigs together; so, coiling round
her heart, burnt secretly Love the destroyer; and the hue of her soft
cheeks went and came, now pale, now red, in her soul's distraction.

(ll. 299-303) Now when the thralls had laid a banquet ready before
them, and they had refreshed themselves with warm baths, gladly did they
please their souls with meat and drink. And thereafter Aeetes questioned
the sons of his daughter, addressing them with these words:

(ll. 304-316) "Sons of my daughter and of Phrixus, whom beyond all
strangers I honoured in my halls, how have ye come returning back to
Aea? Did some calamity cut short your escape in the midst? Ye did not
listen when I set before you the boundless length of the way. For I
marked it once, whirled along in the chariot of my father Helios, when
he was bringing my sister Circe to the western land and we came to the
shore of the Tyrrhenian mainland, where even now she abides, exceeding
far from Colchis. But what pleasure is there in words? Do ye tell
me plainly what has been your fortune, and who these men are, your
companions, and where from your hollow ship ye came ashore."

(ll. 317-319) Such were his questions, and Argus, before all his
brethren, being fearful for the mission of Aeson's son, gently replied,
for he was the elder-born:

(ll. 320-366) "Aeetes, that ship forthwith stormy blasts tore asunder,
and ourselves, crouching on the beams, a wave drove on to the beach of
the isle of Enyalius [1303] in the murky night; and some god preserved
us. For even the birds of Ares that haunted the desert isle beforetime,
not even them did we find. But these men had driven them off, having
landed from their ship on the day before; and the will of Zeus taking
pity on us, or some fate, detained them there, since they straightway
gave us both food and clothing in abundance, when they heard the
illustrious name of Phrixus and thine own; for to thy city are they
faring. And if thou dost wish to know their errand, I will not hide it
from time. A certain king, vehemently longing to drive this man far from
his fatherland and possessions, because in might he outshone all the
sons of Aeolus, sends him to voyage hither on a bootless venture; and
asserts that the stock of Aeolus will not escape the heart-grieving
wrath and rage of implacable Zeus, nor the unbearable curse and
vengeance due for Phrixus, until the fleece comes back to Hellas. And
their ship was fashioned by Pallas Athena, not such a one as are the
ships among the Colchians, on the vilest of which we chanced. For the
fierce waves and wind broke her utterly to pieces; but the other holds
firm with her bolts, even though all the blasts should buffet her. And
with equal swiftness she speedeth before the wind and when the crew ply
the oar with unresting hands. And he hath gathered in her the mightiest
heroes of all Achaea, and hath come to thy city from wandering far
through cities and gulfs of the dread ocean, in the hope that thou wilt
grant him the fleece. But as thou dost please, so shall it be, for he
cometh not to use force, but is eager to pay thee a recompense for the
gift. He has heard from me of thy bitter foes the Sauromatae, and he
will subdue them to thy sway. And if thou desirest to know their names
and lineage I will tell thee all. This man on whose account the rest
were gathered from Hellas, they call Jason, son of Aeson, whom Cretheus
begat. And if in truth he is of the stock of Cretheus himself, thus he
would be our kinsman on the father's side. For Cretheus and Athamas were
both sons of Aeolus; and Phrixus was the son of Athamas, son of Aeolus.
And here, if thou hast heard at all of the seed of Helios, thou dost
behold Augeias; and this is Telamon sprung from famous Aeacus; and Zeus
himself begat Aeacus. And so all the rest, all the comrades that follow
him, are the sons or grandsons of the immortals."

(ll. 367-371) Such was the tale of Argus; but the king at his words was
filled with rage as he heard; and his heart was lifted high in wrath.
And he spake in heavy displeasure; and was angered most of all with the
son of Chalciope; for he deemed that on their account the strangers had
come; and in his fury his eyes flashed forth beneath his brows:

(ll. 372-381) "Begone from my sight, felons, straightway, ye and your
tricks, from the land, ere someone see a fleece and a Phrixus to his
sorrow. Banded together with your friends from Hellas, not for the
fleece, but to seize my sceptre and royal power have ye come hither.
Had ye not first tasted of my table, surely would I have cut out your
tongues and hewn off both hands and sent you forth with your feet alone,
so that ye might be stayed from starting hereafter. And what lies have
ye uttered against the blessed gods!"

(ll. 382-385) Thus he spake in his wrath; and mightily from its depths
swelled the heart of Aeacus' son, and his soul within longed to speak
a deadly word in defiance, but Aeson's son checked him, for he himself
first made gentle answer:

(ll. 386-395) "Aeetes, bear with this armed band, I pray. For not in the
way thou deemest have we come to thy city and palace, no, nor yet with
such desires. For who would of his own will dare to cross so wide a
sea for the goods of a stranger? But fate and the ruthless command of a
presumptuous king urged me. Grant a favour to thy suppliants, and to all
Hellas will I publish a glorious fame of thee; yea, we are ready now to
pay thee a swift recompense in war, whether it be the Sauromatae or some
other people that thou art eager to subdue to thy sway."

(ll. 396-400) He spake, flattering him with gentle utterance; but the
king's soul brooded a twofold purpose within him, whether he should
attack and slay them on the spot or should make trial of their might.
And this, as he pondered, seemed the better way, and he addressed Jason
in answer:

(ll. 401-421) "Stranger, why needest thou go through thy tale to the
end? For if ye are in truth of heavenly race, or have come in no wise
inferior to me, to win the goods of strangers, I will give thee the
fleece to bear away, if thou dost wish, when I have tried thee. For
against brave men I bear no grudge, such as ye yourselves tell me of him
who bears sway in Hellas. And the trial of your courage and might shall
be a contest which I myself can compass with my hands, deadly though it
be. Two bulls with feet of bronze I have that pasture on the plain of
Ares, breathing forth flame from their jaws; them do I yoke and drive
over the stubborn field of Ares, four plough-gates; and quickly cleaving
it with the share up to the headland, I cast into the furrows the seed,
not the corn of Demeter, but the teeth of a dread serpent that grow up
into the fashion of armed men; them I slay at once, cutting them down
beneath my spear as they rise against me on all sides. In the morning do
I yoke the oxen, and at eventide I cease from the harvesting. And thou,
if thou wilt accomplish such deeds as these, on that very day shalt
carry off the fleece to the king's palace; ere that time comes I will
not give it, expect it not. For indeed it is unseemly that a brave man
should yield to a coward."

(ll. 422-426) Thus he spake; and Jason, fixing his eyes on the ground,
sat just as he was, speechless, helpless in his evil plight. For a long
time he turned the matter this way and that, and could in no way take on
him the task with courage, for a mighty task it seemed; and at last he
made reply with crafty words:

(ll. 427-431) "With thy plea of right, Aeetes, thou dost shut me in
overmuch. Wherefore also I will dare that contest, monstrous as it is,
though it be my doom to die. For nothing will fall upon men more dread
than dire necessity, which indeed constrained me to come hither at a
king's command."

(ll. 432-438) Thus he spake, smitten by his helpless plight; and the
king with grim words addressed him, sore troubled as he was: "Go forth
now to the gathering, since thou art eager for the toil; but if thou
shouldst fear to lift the yoke upon the oxen or shrink from the deadly
harvesting, then all this shall be my care, so that another too may
shudder to come to a man that is better than he."

(ll. 439-463) He spake outright; and Jason rose from his seat, and
Augeias and Telamon at once; and Argus followed alone, for he signed to
his brothers to stay there on the spot meantime; and so they went forth
from the hall. And wonderfully among them all shone the son of Aeson
for beauty and grace; and the maiden looked at him with stealthy glance,
holding her bright veil aside, her heart smouldering with pain; and
her soul creeping like a dream flitted in his track as he went. So they
passed forth from the palace sorely troubled. And Chalciope, shielding
herself from the wrath of Aeetes, had gone quickly to her chamber with
her sons. And Medea likewise followed, and much she brooded in her soul
all the cares that the Loves awaken. And before her eyes the vision
still appeared--himself what like he was, with what vesture he was clad,
what things he spake, how he sat on his seat, how he moved forth to the
door--and as she pondered she deemed there never was such another man;
and ever in her ears rung his voice and the honey-sweet words which he
uttered. And she feared for him, lest the oxen or Aeetes with his
own hand should slay him; and she mourned him as though already slain
outright, and in her affliction a round tear through very grievous
pity coursed down her cheek; and gently weeping she lifted up her voice
aloud:

(ll. 464-470) "Why does this grief come upon me, poor wretch? Whether he
be the best of heroes now about to perish, or the worst, let him go to
his doom. Yet I would that he had escaped unharmed; yea, may this be so,
revered goddess, daughter of Perses, may he avoid death and return home;
but if it be his lot to be o'ermastered by the oxen, may he first learn
this, that I at least do not rejoice in his cruel calamity."

(ll. 471-474) Thus then was the maiden's heart racked by love-cares. But
when the others had gone forth from the people and the city, along the
path by which at the first they had come from the plain, then Argus
addressed Jason with these words:

(ll. 475-483) "Son of Aeson, thou wilt despise the counsel which I will
tell thee, but, though in evil plight, it is not fitting to forbear from
the trial. Ere now thou hast heard me tell of a maiden that uses sorcery
under the guidance of Hecate, Perses' daughter. If we could win her
aid there will be no dread, methinks, of thy defeat in the contest;
but terribly do I fear that my mother will not take this task upon
her. Nevertheless I will go back again to entreat her, for a common
destruction overhangs us all."

(ll. 383-491) He spake with goodwill, and Jason answered with these
words: "Good friend, if this is good in thy sight, I say not nay. Go and
move thy mother, beseeching her aid with prudent words; pitiful indeed
is our hope when we have put our return in the keeping of women." So
he spake, and quickly they reached the back-water. And their comrades
joyfully questioned them, when they saw them close at hand; and to them
spoke Aeson's son grieved at heart:

(ll. 492-501) "My friends, the heart of ruthless Aeetes is utterly
filled with wrath against us, for not at all can the goal be reached
either by me or by you who question me. He said that two bulls with feet
of bronze pasture on the plain of Ares, breathing forth flame from their
jaws. And with these he bade me plough the field, four plough-gates; and
said that he would give me from a serpent's jaws seed which will raise
up earthborn men in armour of bronze; and on the same day I must slay
them. This task--for there was nothing better to devise--I took on
myself outright."

(ll. 502-514) Thus he spake; and to all the contest seemed one that
none could accomplish, and long, quiet and silent, they looked at one
another, bowed down with the calamity and their despair; but at last
Peleus spake with courageous words among all the chiefs: "It is time
to be counselling what we shall do. Yet there is not so much profit, I
trow, in counsel as in the might of our hands. If thou then, hero son
of Aeson, art minded to yoke Aeetes' oxen, and art eager for the toil,
surely thou wilt keep thy promise and make thyself ready. But if thy
soul trusts not her prowess utterly, then neither bestir thyself nor sit
still and look round for some one else of these men. For it is not I who
will flinch, since the bitterest pain will be but death."

(ll. 515-522) So spake the son of Aeacus; and Telamon's soul was
stirred, and quickly he started up in eagerness; and Idas rose up
the third in his pride; and the twin sons of Tyndareus; and with them
Oeneus' son who was numbered among strong men, though even the soft down
on his cheek showed not yet; with such courage was his soul uplifted.
But the others gave way to these in silence. And straightway Argus spake
these words to those that longed for the contest:

(ll. 523-539) "My friends, this indeed is left us at the last. But
I deem that there will come to you some timely aid from my mother.
Wherefore, eager though ye be, refrain and abide in your ship a little
longer as before, for it is better to forbear than recklessly to choose
an evil fate. There is a maiden, nurtured in the halls of Aeetes, whom
the goddess Hecate taught to handle magic herbs with exceeding skill
all that the land and flowing waters produce. With them is quenched the
blast of unwearied flame, and at once she stays the course of rivers as
they rush roaring on, and checks the stars and the paths of the sacred
moon. Of her we bethought us as we came hither along the path from the
palace, if haply my mother, her own sister, might persuade her to aid us
in the venture. And if this is pleasing to you as well, surely on
this very day will I return to the palace of Aeetes to make trial; and
perchance with some god's help shall I make the trial."

(ll. 540-544) Thus he spake, and the gods in their goodwill gave them
a sign. A trembling dove in her flight from a mighty hawk fell from on
high, terrified, into the lap of Aeson's son, and the hawk fell impaled
on the stern-ornament. And quickly Mopsus with prophetic words spake
among them all:

(ll. 545-554) "For you, friends, this sign has been wrought by the
will of heaven; in no other way is it possible to interpret its meaning
better, than to seek out the maiden and entreat her with manifold skill.
And I think she will not reject our prayer, if in truth Phineus said
that our return should be with the help of the Cyprian goddess. It was
her gentle bird that escaped death; and as my heart within me foresees
according to this omen, so may it prove! But, my friends, let us call on
Cytherea to aid us, and now at once obey the counsels of Argus."

(ll. 555-563) He spake, and the warriors approved, remembering the
injunctions of Phineus; but all alone leapt up Apharcian Idas and
shouted loudly in terrible wrath: "Shame on us, have we come here fellow
voyagers with women, calling on Cypris for help and not on the mighty
strength of Enyalius? And do ye look to doves and hawks to save
yourselves from contests? Away with you, take thought not for deeds of
war, but by supplication to beguile weakling girls."

(ll. 564-571) Such were his eager words; and of his comrades many
murmured low, but none uttered a word of answer back. And he sat down in
wrath; and at once Jason roused them and uttered his own thought: "Let
Argus set forth from the ship, since this pleases all; but we will now
move from the river and openly fasten our hawsers to the shore. For
surely it is not fitting for us to hide any longer cowering from the
battle-cry."

(ll. 572-575) So he spake, and straightway sent Argus to return in
haste to the city; and they drew the anchors on board at the command of
Aeson's son, and rowed the ship close to the shore, a little away from
the back-water.

(ll. 576-608) But straightway Aeetes held an assembly of the Colchians
far aloof from his palace at a spot where they sat in times before, to
devise against the Minyae grim treachery and troubles. And he threatened
that when first the oxen should have torn in pieces the man who had
taken upon him to perform the heavy task, he would hew down the oak
grove above the wooded hill, and burn the ship and her crew, that so
they might vent forth in ruin their grievous insolence, for all their
haughty schemes. For never would he have welcomed the Aeolid Phrixus as
a guest in his halls, in spite of his sore need, Phrixus, who surpassed
all strangers in gentleness and fear of the gods, had not Zeus himself
sent Hermes his messenger down from heaven, so that he might meet with
a friendly host; much less would pirates coming to his land be let go
scatheless for long, men whose care it was to lift their hands and seize
the goods of others, and to weave secret webs of guile, and harry the
steadings of herdsmen with ill-sounding forays. And he said that besides
all that the sons of Phrixus should pay a fitting penalty to himself for
returning in consort with evildoers, that they might recklessly drive
him from his honour and his throne; for once he had heard a baleful
prophecy from his father Helios, that he must avoid the secret treachery
and schemes of his own offspring and their crafty mischief. Wherefore he
was sending them, as they desired, to the Achaean land at the bidding
of their father--a long journey. Nor had he ever so slight a fear of
his daughters, that they would form some hateful scheme, nor of his
son Apsyrtus; but this curse was being fulfilled in the children of
Chalciope. And he proclaimed terrible things in his rage against the
strangers, and loudly threatened to keep watch over the ship and its
crew, so that no one might escape calamity.

(ll. 609-615) Meantime Argus, going to Aeetes' palace, with manifold
pleading besought his mother to pray Medea's aid; and Chalciope herself
already had the same thoughts, but fear checked her soul lest haply
either fate should withstand and she should entreat her in vain, all
distraught as she would be at her father's deadly wrath, or, if Medea
yielded to her prayers, her deeds should be laid bare and open to view.

(ll. 616-635) Now a deep slumber had relieved the maiden from her
love-pains as she lay upon her couch. But straightway fearful dreams,
deceitful, such as trouble one in grief, assailed her. And she thought
that the stranger had taken on him the contest, not because he longed
to win the ram's fleece, and that he had not come on that account to
Aeetes' city, but to lead her away, his wedded wife, to his own home;
and she dreamed that herself contended with the oxen and wrought the
task with exceeding ease; and that her own parents set at naught their
promise, for it was not the maiden they had challenged to yoke the oxen
but the stranger himself; from that arose a contention of doubtful issue
between her father and the strangers; and both laid the decision
upon her, to be as she should direct in her mind. But she suddenly,
neglecting her parents, chose the stranger. And measureless anguish
seized them and they shouted out in their wrath; and with the cry sleep
released its hold upon her. Quivering with fear she started up, and
stared round the walls of her chamber, and with difficulty did she
gather her spirit within her as before, and lifted her voice aloud:

(ll. 636-644) "Poor wretch, how have gloomy dreams affrighted me! I fear
that this voyage of the heroes will bring some great evil. My heart is
trembling for the stranger. Let him woo some Achaean girl far away among
his own folk; let maidenhood be mine and the home of my parents. Yet,
taking to myself a reckless heart, I will no more keep aloof but will
make trial of my sister to see if she will entreat me to aid in the
contest, through grief for her own sons; this would quench the bitter
pain in my heart."

(ll. 645-673) She spake, and rising from her bed opened the door of her
chamber, bare-footed, clad in one robe; and verily she desired to go to
her sister, and crossed the threshold. And for long she stayed there
at the entrance of her chamber, held back by shame; and she turned back
once more; and again she came forth from within, and again stole back;
and idly did her feet bear her this way and that; yea, as oft as she
went straight on, shame held her within the chamber, and though held
back by shame, bold desire kept urging her on. Thrice she made the
attempt and thrice she checked herself, the fourth time she fell on her
bed face downward, writhing in pain. And as when a bride in her chamber
bewails her youthful husband, to whom her brothers and parents have
given her, nor yet does she hold converse with all her attendants for
shame and for thinking of him; but she sits apart in her grief; and some
doom has destroyed him, before they have had pleasure of each other's
charms; and she with heart on fire silently weeps, beholding her widowed
couch, in fear lest the women should mock and revile her; like to her
did Medea lament. And suddenly as she was in the midst of her tears, one
of the handmaids came forth and noticed her, one who was her youthful
attendant; and straightway she told Chalciope, who sat in the midst of
her sons devising how to win over her sister. And when Chalciope heard
the strange tale from the handmaid, not even so did she disregard it.
And she rushed in dismay from her chamber right on to the chamber where
the maiden lay in her anguish, having torn her cheeks on each side; and
when Chalciope saw her eyes all dimmed with tears, she thus addressed
her:

(ll. 674-680) "Ah me, Medea, why dost thou weep so? What hath befallen
thee? What terrible grief has entered thy heart? Has some heaven-sent
disease enwrapt thy frame, or hast thou heard from our father some
deadly threat concerning me and my sons? Would that I did not behold
this home of my parents, or the city, but dwelt at the ends of the
earth, where not even the name of Colchians is known!"

(ll. 681-687) Thus she spake, and her sister's cheeks flushed; and
though she was eager to reply, long did maiden shame restrain her.
At one moment the word rose on the end of her tongue, at another it
fluttered back deep within her breast. And often through her lovely lips
it strove for utterance; but no sound came forth; till at last she spoke
with guileful words; for the bold Loves were pressing her hard:

(ll. 688-692) "Chalciope, my heart is all trembling for thy sons, lest
my father forthwith destroy them together with the strangers. Slumbering
just now in a short-lived sleep such a ghastly dream did I see--may some
god forbid its fulfilment and never mayst thou win for thyself bitter
care on thy sons' account."

(ll. 693-704) She spake, making trial of her sister to see if she first
would entreat help for her sons. And utterly unbearable grief surged
over Chalciope's soul for fear at what she heard; and then she replied:
"Yea, I myself too have come to thee in eager furtherance of this
purpose, if thou wouldst haply devise with me and prepare some help. But
swear by Earth and Heaven that thou wilt keep secret in thy heart what
I shall tell thee, and be fellow-worker with me. I implore thee by the
blessed gods, by thyself and by thy parents, not to see them destroyed
by an evil doom piteously; or else may I die with my dear sons and come
back hereafter from Hades an avenging Fury to haunt thee."

(ll. 705-710) Thus she spake, and straightway a torrent of tears gushed
forth and low down she clasped her sister's knees with both hands
and let her head sink on to her breast. Then they both made piteous
lamentation over each other, and through the halls rose the faint sound
of women weeping in anguish. Medea, sore troubled, first addressed her
sister:

(ll. 711-717) "God help thee, what healing can I bring thee for what
thou speakest of, horrible curses and Furies? Would that it were
firmly in my power to save thy sons! Be witness that mighty oath of the
Colchians by which thou urgest me to swear, the great Heaven, and Earth
beneath, mother of the gods, that as far as strength lies in me, never
shalt thou fail of help, if only thy prayers can be accomplished."

(ll. 718-723) She spake, and Chalciope thus replied: "Couldst thou not
then, for the stranger--who himself craves thy aid--devise some trick or
some wise thought to win the contest, for the sake of my sons? And from
him has come Argus urging me to try to win thy help; I left him in the
palace meantime while I came hither."

(ll. 724-739) Thus she spake, and Medea's heart bounded with joy within
her, and at once her fair cheeks flushed, and a mist swam before her
melting eyes, and she spake as follows: "Chalciope, as is dear and
delightful to thee and thy sons, even so will I do. Never may the dawn
appear again to my eyes, never mayst thou see me living any longer, if I
should take thought for anything before thy life or thy sons' lives, for
they are my brothers, my dear kinsmen and youthful companions. So do I
declare myself to be thy sister, and thy daughter too, for thou didst
lift me to thy breast when an infant equally with them, as I ever heard
from my mother in past days. But go, bury my kindness in silence, so
that I may carry out my promise unknown to my parents; and at dawn I
will bring to Hecate's temple charms to cast a spell upon the bulls."

(ll. 740-743) Thus Chalciope went back from the chamber, and made
known to her sons the help given by her sister. And again did shame and
hateful fear seize Medea thus left alone, that she should devise such
deeds for a man in her father's despite.

(ll. 744-771) Then did night draw darkness over the earth; and on the
sea sailors from their ships looked towards the Bear and the stars of
Orion; and now the wayfarer and the warder longed for sleep, and the
pall of slumber wrapped round the mother whose children were dead; nor
was there any more the barking of dogs through the city, nor sound of
men's voices; but silence held the blackening gloom. But not indeed upon
Medea came sweet sleep. For in her love for Aeson's son many cares kept
her wakeful, and she dreaded the mighty strength of the bulls, beneath
whose fury he was like to perish by an unseemly fate in the field of
Ares. And fast did her heart throb within her breast, as a sunbeam
quivers upon the walls of a house when flung up from water, which is
just poured forth in a caldron or a pail may be; and hither and thither
on the swift eddy does it dart and dance along; even so the maiden's
heart quivered in her breast. And the tear of pity flowed from her eyes,
and ever within anguish tortured her, a smouldering fire through her
frame, and about her fine nerves and deep down beneath the nape of the
neck where the pain enters keenest, whenever the unwearied Loves direct
against the heart their shafts of agony. And she thought now that she
would give him the charms to cast a spell on the bulls, now that she
would not, and that she herself would perish; and again that she would
not perish and would not give the charms, but just as she was would
endure her fate in silence. Then sitting down she wavered in mind and
said:

(ll. 772-801) "Poor wretch, must I toss hither and thither in woe? On
every side my heart is in despair; nor is there any help for my pain;
but it burneth ever thus. Would that I had been slain by the swift
shafts of Artemis before I had set eyes on him, before Chalciope's sons
reached the Achaean land. Some god or some Fury brought them hither for
our grief, a cause of many tears. Let him perish in the contest if it be
his lot to die in the field. For how could I prepare the charms without
my parents' knowledge? What story call I tell them? What trick, what
cunning device for aid can I find? If I see him alone, apart from his
comrades, shall I greet him? Ill-starred that I am! I cannot hope that I
should rest from my sorrows even though he perished; then will evil come
to me when he is bereft of life. Perish all shame, perish all glow; may
he, saved by my effort, go scatheless wherever his heart desires. But
as for me, on the day when he bides the contest in triumph, may I die
either straining my neck in the noose from the roof-tree or tasting
drugs destructive of life. But even so, when I am dead, they will fling
out taunts against me; and every city far away will ring with my
doom, and the Colchian women, tossing my name on their lips hither and
thither, will revile me with unseemly mocking--the maid who cared so
much for a stranger that she died, the maid who disgraced her home and
her parents, yielding to a mad passion. And what disgrace will not be
mine? Alas for my infatuation! Far better would it be for me to forsake
life this very night in my chamber by some mysterious fate, escaping all
slanderous reproach, before I complete such nameless dishonour."

(ll. 802-824) She spake, and brought a casket wherein lay many drugs,
some for healing, others for killing, and placing it upon her knees she
wept. And she drenched her bosom with ceaseless tears, which flowed in
torrents as she sat, bitterly bewailing her own fate. And she longed to
choose a murderous drug to taste it, and now she was loosening the
bands of the casket eager to take it forth, unhappy maid! But suddenly a
deadly fear of hateful Hades came upon her heart. And long she held
back in speechless horror, and all around her thronged visions of the
pleasing cares of life. She thought of all the delightful things that
are among the living, she thought of her joyous playmates, as a maiden
will; and the sun grew sweeter than ever to behold, seeing that in truth
her soul yearned for all. And she put the casket again from off her
knees, all changed by the prompting of Hera, and no more did she waver
in purpose; but longed for the rising dawn to appear quickly, that she
might give him the charms to work the spell as she had promised, and
meet him face to face. And often did she loosen the bolts of her door,
to watch for the faint gleam: and welcome to her did the dayspring shed
its light, and folk began to stir throughout the city.

(ll. 825-827) Then Argus bade his brothers remain there to learn the
maiden's mind and plans, but himself turned back and went to the ship.

(ll. 828-890) Now soon as ever the maiden saw the light of dawn, with
her hands she gathered up her golden tresses which were floating round
her shoulders in careless disarray, and bathed her tear-stained cheeks,
and made her skin shine with ointment sweet as nectar; and she donned
a beautiful robe, fitted with well-bent clasps, and above on her head,
divinely fair, she threw a veil gleaming like silver. And there,
moving to and fro in the palace, she trod the ground forgetful of the
heaven-sent woes thronging round her and of others that were destined
to follow. And she called to her maids. Twelve they were, who lay during
the night in the vestibule of her fragrant chamber, young as herself,
not yet sharing the bridal couch, and she bade them hastily yoke the
mules to the chariot to bear her to the beauteous shrine of Hecate.
Thereupon the handmaids were making ready the chariot; and Medea
meanwhile took from the hollow casket a charm which men say is called
the charm of Prometheus. If a man should anoint his body therewithal,
having first appeased the Maiden, the only-begotten, with sacrifice by
night, surely that man could not be wounded by the stroke of bronze
nor would he flinch from blazing fire; but for that day he would prove
superior both in prowess and in might. It shot up first-born when the
ravening eagle on the rugged flanks of Caucasus let drip to the earth
the blood-like ichor of tortured Prometheus. And its flower appeared a
cubit above ground in colour like the Corycian crocus, rising on twin
stalks; but in the earth the root was like newly-cut flesh. The dark
juice of it, like the sap of a mountain-oak, she had gathered in a
Caspian shell to make the charm withal, when she had first bathed in
seven ever-flowing streams, and had called seven times on Brimo, nurse
of youth, night-wandering Brimo, of the underworld, queen among the
dead,--in the gloom of night, clad in dusky garments. And beneath, the
dark earth shook and bellowed when the Titanian root was cut; and the
son of Iapetus himself groaned, his soul distraught with pain. And
she brought the charm forth and placed it in the fragrant band which
engirdled her, just beneath her bosom, divinely fair. And going forth
she mounted the swift chariot, and with her went two handmaidens on
each side. And she herself took the reins and in her right hand the
well-fashioned whip, and drove through the city; and the rest, the
handmaids, laid their hands on the chariot behind and ran along the
broad highway; and they kilted up their light robes above their white
knees. And even as by the mild waters of Parthenius, or after bathing
in the river Amnisus, Leto's daughter stands upon her golden chariot and
courses over the hills with her swift-footed roes, to greet from
afar some richly-steaming hecatomb; and with her come the nymphs in
attendance, gathering, some at the spring of Amnisus itself, others by
the glens and many-fountained peaks; and round her whine and fawn the
beasts cowering as she moves along: thus they sped through the city;
and on both sides the people gave way, shunning the eyes of the royal
maiden. But when she had left the city's well paved streets, and was
approaching the shrine as she drove over the plains, then she alighted
eagerly from the smooth-running chariot and spake as follows among her
maidens:

(ll. 891-911) "Friends, verily have I sinned greatly and took no heed
not to go among the stranger-folk 1 who roam over our land. The whole
city is smitten with dismay; wherefore no one of the women who formerly
gathered here day by day has now come hither. But since we have come
and no one else draws near, come, let us satisfy our souls without stint
with soothing song, and when we have plucked the fair flowers amid the
tender grass, that very hour will we return. And with many a gift shall
ye reach home this very day, if ye will gladden me with this desire of
mine. For Argus pleads with me, also Chalciope herself; but this that
ye hear from me keep silently in your hearts, lest the tale reach my
father's ears. As for yon stranger who took on him the task with the
oxen, they bid me receive his gifts and rescue him from the deadly
contest. And I approved their counsel, and I have summoned him to come
to my presence apart from his comrades, so that we may divide the gifts
among ourselves if he bring them in his hands, and in return may give
him a baleful charm. But when he comes, do ye stand aloof."

(ll. 912-918) So she spake, and the crafty counsel pleased them all. And
straightway Argus drew Aeson's son apart from his comrades as soon as
he heard from his brothers that Medea had gone at daybreak to the holy
shrine of Hecate, and led him over the plain; and with them went Mopsus,
son of Ampycus, skilled to utter oracles from the appearance of birds,
and skilled to give good counsel to those who set out on a journey.

(ll. 919-926) Never yet had there been such a man in the days of old,
neither of all the heroes of the lineage of Zeus himself, nor of those
who sprung from the blood of the other gods, as on that day the bride of
Zeus made Jason, both to look upon and to hold converse with. Even his
comrades wondered as they gazed upon him, radiant with manifold graces;
and the son of Ampycus rejoiced in their journey, already foreboding how
all would end.

(ll. 927-931) Now by the path along the plain there stands near the
shrine a poplar with its crown of countless leaves, whereon often
chattering crows would roost. One of them meantime as she clapped her
wings aloft in the branches uttered the counsels of Hera:

(ll. 932-937) "What a pitiful seer is this, that has not the wit to
conceive even what children know, how that no maiden will say a word
of sweetness or love to a youth when strangers be near. Begone, sorry
prophet, witless one; on thee neither Cypris nor the gentle Loves
breathe in their kindness."

(ll. 938-946) She spake chiding, and Mopsus smiled to hear the god-sent
voice of the bird, and thus addressed them: "Do thou, son of Aeson, pass
on to the temple, where thou wilt find the maiden; and very kind will
her greeting be to thee through the prompting of Cypris, who will be thy
helpmate in the contest, even as Phineus, Agenor's son, foretold. But
we two, Argus and I, will await thy return, apart in this very spot; do
thou all alone be a suppliant and win her over with prudent words."

(ll. 947-974) He spake wisely, and both at once gave approval. Nor was
Medea's heart turned to other thoughts, for all her singing, and never
a song that she essayed pleased her long in her sport. But in confusion
she ever faltered, nor did she keep her eyes resting quietly upon the
throng of her handmaids; but to the paths far off she strained her gaze,
turning her face aside. Oft did her heart sink fainting within her bosom
whenever she fancied she heard passing by the sound of a footfall or
of the wind. But soon he appeared to her longing eyes, striding along
loftily, like Sirius coming from ocean, which rises fair and clear to
see, but brings unspeakable mischief to flocks; thus then did Aeson's
son come to her, fair to see, but the sight of him brought love-sick
care. Her heart fell from out her bosom, and a dark mist came over her
eyes, and a hot blush covered her cheeks. And she had no strength to
lift her knees backwards or forwards, but her feet beneath were rooted
to the ground; and meantime all her handmaidens had drawn aside. So they
two stood face to face without a word, without a sound, like oaks or
lofty pines, which stand quietly side by side on the mountains when the
wind is still; then again, when stirred by the breath of the wind, they
murmur ceaselessly; so they two were destined to tell out all their
tale, stirred by the breath of Love. And Aeson's son saw that she had
fallen into some heaven-sent calamity, and with soothing words thus
addressed her:

(ll. 975-1007) "Why, pray, maiden, dost thou fear me so much, all
alone as I am? Never was I one of these idle boasters such as other
men are--not even aforetime, when I dwelt in my own country. Wherefore,
maiden, be not too much abashed before me, either to enquire whatever
thou wilt or to speak thy mind. But since we have met one another with
friendly hearts, in a hallowed spot, where it is wrong to sin, speak
openly and ask questions, and beguile me not with pleasing words, for at
the first thou didst promise thy sister to give me the charms my heart
desires. I implore thee by Hecate herself, by thy parents, and by Zeus
who holds his guardian hand over strangers and suppliants; I come here
to thee both a suppliant and a stranger, bending the knee in my sore
need. For without thee and thy sister never shall I prevail in the
grievous contest. And to thee will I render thanks hereafter for thy
aid, as is right and fitting for men who dwell far oft, making glorious
thy name and fame; and the rest of the heroes, returning to Hellas, will
spread thy renown and so will the heroes' wives and mothers, who now
perhaps are sitting on the shore and making moan for us; their painful
affliction thou mightest scatter to the winds. In days past the maiden
Ariadne, daughter of Minos, with kindly intent rescued Theseus from grim
contests--the maiden whom Pasiphae daughter of Helios bare. But she,
when Minos had lulled his wrath to rest, went aboard the ship with him
and left her fatherland; and her even the immortal gods loved, and, as a
sign in mid-sky, a crown of stars, which men call Ariadne's crown, rolls
along all night among the heavenly constellations. So to thee too
shall be thanks from the gods, if thou wilt save so mighty an array of
chieftains. For surely from thy lovely form thou art like to excel in
gentle courtest."

(ll. 1008-1025) Thus he spake, honouring her; and she cast her eyes down
with a smile divinely sweet; and her soul melted within her, uplifted by
his praise, and she gazed upon him face to face; nor did she know what
word to utter first, but was eager to pour out everything at once. And
forth from her fragrant girdle ungrudgingly she brought out the charm;
and he at once received it in his hands with joy. And she would even
have drawn out all her soul from her breast and given it to him,
exulting in his desire; so wonderfully did love flash forth a sweet
flame from the golden head of Aeson's son; and he captivated her
gleaming eyes; and her heart within grew warm, melting away as the dew
melts away round roses when warmed by the morning's light. And now both
were fixing their eyes on the ground abashed, and again were throwing
glances at each other, smiling with the light of love beneath their
radiant brows. And at last and scarcely then did the maiden greet him:

(ll. 1026-1062) "Take heed now, that I may devise help for thee. When at
thy coming my father has given thee the deadly teeth from the dragon's
jaws for sowing, then watch for the time when the night is parted in
twain, then bathe in the stream of the tireless river, and alone, apart
from others, clad in dusky raiment, dig a rounded pit; and therein slay
a ewe, and sacrifice it whole, heaping high the pyre on the very edge
of the pit. And propitiate only-begotten Hecate, daughter of Perses,
pouring from a goblet the hive-stored labour of bees. And then, when
thou hast heedfully sought the grace of the goddess, retreat from the
pyre; and let neither the sound of feet drive thee to turn back, nor
the baying of hounds, lest haply thou shouldst maim all the rites and
thyself fail to return duly to thy comrades. And at dawn steep this
charm in water, strip, and anoint thy body therewith as with oil; and
in it there will be boundless prowess and mighty strength, and thou wilt
deem thyself a match not for men but for the immortal gods. And
besides, let thy spear and shield and sword be sprinkled. Thereupon the
spear-heads of the earthborn men shall not pierce thee, nor the flame of
the deadly bulls as it rushes forth resistless. But such thou shalt be
not for long, but for that one day; still never flinch from the contest.
And I will tell thee besides of yet another help. As soon as thou hast
yoked the strong oxen, and with thy might and thy prowess hast ploughed
all the stubborn fallow, and now along the furrows the Giants are
springing up, when the serpent's teeth are sown on the dusky clods, if
thou markest them uprising in throngs from the fallow, cast unseen among
them a massy stone; and they over it, like ravening hounds over their
food, will slay one another; and do thou thyself hasten to rush to the
battle-strife, and the fleece thereupon thou shalt bear far away from
Aea; nevertheless, depart wherever thou wilt, or thy pleasure takes
thee, when thou hast gone hence."

(ll. 1063-1068) Thus she spake, and cast her eyes to her feet in
silence, and her cheek, divinely fair, was wet with warm tears as she
sorrowed for that he was about to wander far from her side over the wide
sea: and once again she addressed him face to face with mournful words,
and took his right hand; for now shame had left her eyes:

(ll. 1069-1076) "Remember, if haply thou returnest to thy home, Medea's
name; and so will I remember thine, though thou be far away. And of thy
kindness tell me this, where is thy home, whither wilt thou sail hence
in thy ship over the sea; wilt thou come near wealthy Orchomenus, or
near the Aeaean isle? And tell me of the maiden, whosoever she be that
thou hast named, the far-renowned daughter of Pasiphae, who is kinswoman
to my father."

(ll. 1077-1078) Thus she spake; and over him too, at the tears of the
maiden, stole Love the destroyer, and he thus answered her:

(ll. 1079-1101) "All too surely do I deem that never by night and never
by day will I forget thee if I escape death and indeed make my way in
safety to the Achaean land, and Aeetes set not before us some other
contest worse than this. And if it pleases thee to know about my
fatherland, I will tell it out; for indeed my own heart bids me do
that. There is a land encircled by lofty mountains, rich in sheep and in
pasture, where Prometheus, son of Iapetus, begat goodly Deucalion, who
first founded cities and reared temples to the immortal gods, and first
ruled over men. This land the neighbours who dwell around call Haemonia.
And in it stands Ioleus, my city, and in it many others, where they have
not so much as heard the name of the Aeaean isle; yet there is a story
that Minyas starting thence, Minyas son of Aeolus, built long ago the
city of Orchomenus that borders on the Cadmeians. But why do I tell
thee all this vain talk, of our home and of Minos' daughter, far-famed
Ariadne, by which glorious name they called that lovely maiden of whom
thou askest me? Would that, as Minos then was well inclined to Theseus
for her sake, so may thy father be joined to us in friendship!"

(ll. 1102-1104) Thus he spake, soothing her with gentle converse. But
pangs most bitter stirred her heart and in grief did she address him
with vehement words:

(ll. 1105-1117) "In Hellas, I ween, this is fair to pay heed to
covenants; but Aeetes is not such a man among men as thou sayest was
Pasiphae's husband, Minos; nor can I liken myself to Ariadne; wherefore
speak not of guest-love. But only do thou, when thou hast reached
Iolcus, remember me, and thee even in my parents' despite, will
I remember. And from far off may a rumour come to me or some
messenger-bird, when thou forgettest me; or me, even me, may swift
blasts catch up and bear over the sea hence to Iolcus, that so I may
cast reproaches in thy face and remind thee that it was by my good will
thou didst escape. May I then be seated in thy halls, an unexpected
guest!"

(ll. 1118-1130) Thus she spake with piteous tears falling down her
cheeks, and to her Jason replied: "Let the empty blasts wander at will,
lady, and the messenger-bird, for vain is thy talk. But if thou comest
to those abodes and to the land of Hellas, honoured and reverenced shalt
thou be by women and men; and they shall worship thee even as a goddess,
for that by thy counsel their sons came home again, their brothers
and kinsmen and stalwart husbands were saved from calamity. And in our
bridal chamber shalt thou prepare our couch; and nothing shall come
between our love till the doom of death fold us round."

(ll. 1131-1136) Thus he spake; and her soul melted within her to hear
his words; nevertheless she shuddered to behold the deeds of destruction
to come. Poor wretch! Not long was she destined to refuse a home in
Hellas. For thus Hera devised it, that Aeaean Medea might come to Ioleus
for a bane to Pelias, forsaking her native land.

(ll. 1137-1145) And now her handmaids, glancing at them from a distance,
were grieving in silence; and the time of day required that the maiden
should return home to her mother's side. But she thought not yet of
departing, for her soul delighted both in his beauty and in his winsome
words, but Aeson's son took heed, and spake at last, though late: "It
is time to depart, lest the sunlight sink before we know it, and some
stranger notice all; but again will we come and meet here."

(ll. 1146-1162) So did they two make trial of one another thus far with
gentle words; and thereafter parted. Jason hastened to return in joyous
mood to his comrades and the ship, she to her handmaids; and they all
together came near to meet her, but she marked them not at all as they
thronged around. For her soul had soared aloft amid the clouds. And her
feet of their own accord mounted the swift chariot, and with one hand
she took the reins, and with the other the whip of cunning workmanship,
to drive the mules; and they rushed hasting to the city and the palace.
And when she was come Chalciope in grief for her sons questioned her;
but Medea, distraught by swiftly-changing thoughts, neither heard her
words nor was eager to speak in answer to her questions. But she sat
upon a low stool at the foot of her couch, bending down, her cheek
leaning on her left hand, and her eyes were wet with tears as she
pondered what an evil deed she had taken part in by her counsels.

(ll. 1163-1190) Now when Aeson's son had joined his comrades again in
the spot where he had left them when he departed, he set out to go with
them, telling them all the story, to the gathering of the heroes; and
together they approached the ship. And when they saw Jason they embraced
him and questioned him. And he told to all the counsels of the maiden
and showed the dread charm; but Idas alone of his comrades sat apart
biting down his wrath; and the rest joyous in heart, at the hour
when the darkness of night stayed them, peacefully took thought for
themselves. But at daybreak they sent two men to go to Aeetes and
ask for the seed, first Telamon himself, dear to Ares, and with him
Aethalides, Hermes' famous son. So they went and made no vain journey;
but when they came, lordly Aeetes gave them for the contest the fell
teeth of the Aonian dragon which Cadmus found in Ogygian Thebes when
he came seeking for Europa and there slew the--warder of the spring of
Ares. There he settled by the guidance of the heifer whom Apollo by his
prophetic word granted him to lead him on his way. But the teeth the
Tritonian goddess tore away from the dragon's jaws and bestowed as a
gift upon Aeetes and the slayer. And Agenor's son, Cadmus, sowed them on
the Aonian plains and founded an earthborn people of all who were left
from the spear when Ares did the reaping; and the teeth Aeetes then
readily gave to be borne to the ship, for he deemed not that Jason would
bring the contest to an end, even though he should cast the yoke upon
the oxen.

(ll. 1191-1224) Far away in the west the sun was sailing beneath the
dark earth, beyond the furthest hills of the Aethiopians; and Night was
laying the yoke upon her steeds; and the heroes were preparing their
beds by the hawsers. But Jason, as soon as the stars of Heliee, the
bright-gleaming bear, had set, and the air had all grown still under
heaven, went to a desert spot, like some stealthy thief, with all that
was needful; for beforehand in the daytime had he taken thought for
everything; and Argus came bringing a ewe and milk from the flock; and
them he took from the ship. But when the hero saw a place which was
far away from the tread of men, in a clear meadow beneath the open sky,
there first of all he bathed his tender body reverently in the sacred
river; and round him he placed a dark robe, which Hypsipyle of Lemnos
had given him aforetime, a memorial of many a loving embrace. Then he
dug a pit in the ground of a cubit's depth and heaped up billets of
wood, and over it he cut the throat of the sheep, and duly placed the
carcase above; and he kindled the logs placing fire beneath, and poured
over them mingled libations, calling on Hecate Brimo to aid him in the
contests. And when he had called on her he drew back; and she heard him,
the dread goddess, from the uttermost depths and came to the sacrifice
of Aeson's son; and round her horrible serpents twined themselves among
the oak boughs; and there was a gleam of countless torches; and sharply
howled around her the hounds of hell. All the meadows trembled at her
step; and the nymphs that haunt the marsh and the river shrieked, all
who dance round that mead of Amarantian Phasis. And fear seized Aeson's
son, but not even so did he turn round as his feet bore him forth, till
he came back to his comrades; and now early dawn arose and shed her
light above snowy Caucasus.

(ll. 1225-1245) Then Aeetes arrayed his breast in the stiff corslet
which Ares gave him when he had slain Phlegraean Mimas with his own
hands; and upon his head he placed a golden helmet with four plumes,
gleaming like the sun's round light when he first rises from Ocean.
And he wielded his shield of many hides, and his spear, terrible,
resistless; none of the heroes could have withstood its shock now that
they had left behind Heracles far away, who alone could have met it in
battle. For the king his well-fashioned chariot of swift steeds was held
near at hand by Phaethon, for him to mount; and he mounted, and held the
reins in his hands. Then from the city he drove along the broad highway,
that he might be present at the contest; and with him a countless
multitude rushed forth. And as Poseidon rides, mounted in his chariot,
to the Isthmian contest or to Taenarus, or to Lerna's water, or through
the grove of Hyantian Onchestus, and thereafter passes even to Calaureia
with his steeds, and the Haemonian rock, or well-wooded Geraestus; even
so was Aeetes, lord of the Colchians, to behold.

(ll. 1246-1277) Meanwhile, prompted by Medea, Jason steeped the charm in
water and sprinkled with it his shield and sturdy spear, and sword; and
his comrades round him made proof of his weapons with might and main,
but could not bend that spear even a little, but it remained firm in
their stalwart hands unbroken as before. But in furious rage with them
Idas, Aphareus' son, with his great sword hewed at the spear near the
butt, and the edge leapt back repelled by the shock, like a hammer
from the anvil; and the heroes shouted with joy for their hope in the
contest. And then he sprinkled his body, and terrible prowess entered
into him, unspeakable, dauntless; and his hands on both sides thrilled
vigorously as they swelled with strength. And as when a warlike steed
eager for the fight neighs and beats the ground with his hoof, while
rejoicing he lifts his neck on high with ears erect; in such wise did
Aeson's son rejoice in the strength of his limbs. And often hither
and thither did he leap high in air tossing in his hands his shield of
bronze and ashen spear. Thou wouldst say that wintry lightning flashing
from the gloomy sky kept on darting forth from the clouds what time they
bring with them their blackest rainstorm. Not long after that were the
heroes to hold back from the contests; but sitting in rows on their
benches they sped swiftly on to the plain of Ares. And it lay in
front of them on the opposite side of the city, as far off as is the
turning-post that a chariot must reach from the starting-point, when the
kinsmen of a dead king appoint funeral games for footmen and horsemen.
And they found Aeetes and the tribes of the Colchians; these were
stationed on the Caucasian heights, but the king by the winding brink of
the river.

(ll. 1278-1325) Now Aeson's son, as soon as his comrades had made the
hawsers fast, leapt from the ship, and with spear and shield came forth
to the contest; and at the same time he took the gleaming helmet of
bronze filled with sharp teeth, and his sword girt round his shoulders,
his body stripped, in somewise resembling Ares and in somewise Apollo
of the golden sword. And gazing over the field he saw the bulls' yoke
of bronze and near it the plough, all of one piece, of stubborn adamant.
Then he came near, and fixed his sturdy spear upright on its butt, and
taking his helmet, off leant it against the spear. And he went forward
with shield alone to examine the countless tracks of the bulls, and
they from some unseen lair beneath the earth, where was their strong
steading, wrapt in murky smoke, both rushed out together, breathing
forth flaming fire. And sore afraid were the heroes at the sight. But
Jason, setting wide his feet, withstood their onset, as in the sea a
rocky reef withstands the waves tossed by the countless blasts. Then in
front of him he held his shield; and both the bulls with loud bellowing
attacked him with their mighty horns; nor did they stir him a jot by
their onset. And as when through the holes of the furnace the armourers'
bellows anon gleam brightly, kindling the ravening flame, and anon cease
from blowing, and a terrible roar rises from the fire when it darts up
from below; so the bulls roared, breathing forth swift flame from
their mouths, while the consuming heat played round him, smiting like
lightning; but the maiden's charms protected him. Then grasping the tip
of the horn of the right-hand bull, he dragged it mightily with all his
strength to bring it near the yoke of bronze, and forced it down on to
its knees, suddenly striking with his foot the foot of bronze. So also
he threw the other bull on to its knees as it rushed upon him, and smote
it down with one blow. And throwing to the ground his broad shield, he
held them both down where they had fallen on their fore-knees, as
he strode from side to side, now here, now there, and rushed swiftly
through the flame. But Aeetes marvelled at the hero's might. And
meantime the sons of Tyndareus for long since had it been thus ordained
for them--near at hand gave him the yoke from the ground to cast round
them. Then tightly did he bind their necks; and lifting the pole of
bronze between them, he fastened it to the yoke by its golden tip. So
the twin heroes started back from the fire to the ship. But Jason took
up again his shield and cast it on his back behind him, and grasped
the strong helmet filled with sharp teeth, and his resistless spear,
wherewith, like some ploughman with a Pelasgian goad, he pricked the
bulls beneath, striking their flanks; and very firmly did he guide the
well fitted plough handle, fashioned of adamant.

(ll. 1326-1339) The bulls meantime raged exceedingly, breathing forth
furious flame of fire; and their breath rose up like the roar of
blustering winds, in fear of which above all seafaring men furl their
large sail. But not long after that they moved on at the bidding of the
spear; and behind them the rugged fallow was broken up, cloven by the
might of the bulls and the sturdy ploughman. Then terribly groaned the
clods withal along the furrows of the plough as they were rent, each a
man's burden; and Jason followed, pressing down the cornfield with firm
foot; and far from him he ever sowed the teeth along the clods as each
was ploughed, turning his head back for fear lest the deadly crop
of earthborn men should rise against him first; and the bulls toiled
onwards treading with their hoofs of bronze.

(ll. 1340-1407) But when the third part of the day was still left as
it wanes from dawn, and wearied labourers call for the sweet hour of
unyoking to come to them straightway, then the fallow was ploughed by
the tireless ploughman, four plough-gates though it was; and he loosed
the plough from the oxen. Them he scared in flight towards the plain;
but he went back again to the ship, while he still saw the furrows free
of the earthborn men. And all round his comrades heartened him with
their shouts. And in the helmet he drew from the river's stream and
quenched his thirst with the water. Then he bent his knees till they
grew supple, and filled his mighty heart with courage, raging like a
boar, when it sharpens its teeth against the hunters, while from its
wrathful mouth plenteous foam drips to the ground. By now the earthborn
men were springing up over all the field; and the plot of Ares, the
death-dealer, bristled with sturdy shields and double-pointed spears and
shining helmets; and the gleam reached Olympus from beneath, flashing
through the air. And as when abundant snow has fallen on the earth and
the storm blasts have dispersed the wintry clouds under the murky night,
and all the hosts of the stars appear shining through the gloom; so did
those warriors shine springing up above the earth. But Jason bethought
him of the counsels of Medea full of craft, and seized from the plain
a huge round boulder, a terrible quoit of Ares Enyalius; four stalwart
youths could not have raised it from the ground even a little. Taking
it in his hands he threw it with a rush far away into their midst; and
himself crouched unseen behind his shield, with full confidence. And the
Colchians gave a loud cry, like the roar of the sea when it beats upon
sharp crags; and speechless amazement seized Aeetes at the rush of the
sturdy quoit. And the Earthborn, like fleet-footed hounds, leaped upon
one another and slew with loud yells; and on earth their mother they
fell beneath their own spears, likes pines or oaks, which storms of wind
beat down. And even as a fiery star leaps from heaven, trailing a furrow
of light, a portent to men, whoever see it darting with a gleam through
the dusky sky; in such wise did Aeson's son rush upon the earthborn men,
and he drew from the sheath his bare sword, and smote here and there,
mowing them down, many on the belly and side, half risen to the air--and
some that had risen as far as the shoulders--and some just standing
upright, and others even now rushing to battle. And as when a fight is
stirred up concerning boundaries, and a husbandman, in fear lest they
should ravage his fields, seizes in his hand a curved sickle, newly
sharpened, and hastily cuts the unripe crop, and waits not for it to be
parched in due season by the beams of the sun; so at that time did Jason
cut down the crop of the Earthborn; and the furrows were filled with
blood, as the channels of a spring with water. And they fell, some on
their faces biting the rough clod of earth with their teeth, some on
their backs, and others on their hands and sides, like to sea-monsters
to behold. And many, smitten before raising their feet from the earth,
bowed down as far to the ground as they had risen to the air, and rested
there with the damp of death on their brows. Even so, I ween, when Zeus
has sent a measureless rain, new planted orchard-shoots droop to the
ground, cut off by the root the toil of gardening men; but heaviness
of heart and deadly anguish come to the owner of the farm, who planted
them; so at that time did bitter grief come upon the heart of King
Aeetes. And he went back to the city among the Colchians, pondering how
he might most quickly oppose the heroes. And the day died, and Jason's
contest was ended.




BOOK IV
BOOK I.

[Footnote 1101: i.e. God of embarcation.]

[Footnote 1102: Or, reading EKTOTHEN, "they strongly girded the ship
outside with a well-twisted rope." In either case there is probably no
allusion to YPOZOMATA (ropes for undergirding) which were carried loose
and only used in stormy weather.]

[Footnote 1103: i.e. God of the shore.]

[Footnote 1104: i.e. The Starting.]

[Footnote 1105: Samothrace.]

[Footnote 1106: i.e. god of disembarcation.]

[Footnote 1107: Cleite means illustrious.]

[Footnote 1108: i.e. to avoid grinding it at home.]

[Footnote 1109: Rhea.]


BOOK II.
BOOK III.

[Footnote 1301: i.e. the fight between the gods and the giants.]

[Footnote 1302: i.e. the Shining One.]

[Footnote 1303: A name of Ares.]

Note 1304: i.e. the liquid that flows in the veins of gods.
(missing anchor)

Note 1305: Or, reading MENIM, "took no heed of the cause of wrath
with the stranger-folk. (missing anchor)


BOOK IV.
